# Andrés

_**Monero desde Cero**_

[https://youtu.be/hdcixrZmn-Y](https://youtu.be/hdcixrZmn-Y)

---

_**Doug:**_ Ok, we’re gonna have Andrés off next. He’s gonna be giving a 101 of Monero in Spanish. Let’s do it.

_**Andrés:**_ Ok, hello. How many of you leave the room right now? Ok. Yeah, yeah. Not that many, not that many. I just taking notes and… Yes, Spanish. Give me just one minute.

Ok, just a brief something in English. This presentation has a lot to do with the way I met Monero in 2017. From that I’ve been making resources a materials for people to understand Monero. Especially focusing in Spanish, because there is none, basically just one or two. And I want to talk about my experience explaining Monero to normal people and some resources for them to use, to explain Monero to all of us. Now in Spanish. You be warned.

Good day, My name is Andrés. I’m from Argentina, you recognize the accent. As I said with I’m in Monero since 2017. From that moment on, it’s been five years since I’ve been working in the Monerujo development group, which is the first mobile application for Monero that was only on Android for now. And now, a few months ago I started my own project that was founded and financed by the Monero community with CSS and that is called the Monero Garden. And what I am going to try to do there is to condense my experience from these last five years, explaining coins to people, and so that they can also do, because what happened to me, and what happens to many people when they meet Monero today, there is more than what there was a few years ago. You don’t know very well where to start to understand - it sounds very, very technical, very, very strange, and many times you even ask yourself halfway for what is it necessary, because Bitcoin is there, because there are other things.

So in my experience explaining it to my closest friends, even giving talks about this in Spanish, I notice three things that I am going to apply in Monero Garden. There are like three archetypes of people that I saw. None of us all special, archetypes of people that I saw none of us are all special none, of us 100% and one, but basically you have people who want to know how to use it, people want to know how it works, and people want to say what to use it for or why it’s worth it and it’s good. If any of you are going to explain it, or you already know Monero, because this talk is going to be a bit basic, about the fundamentals of Monero, that will serve as a resource to explain it to others, because what I noticed is that first, the most difficult thing is to get people interested in Monero.

Here it is not a problem, because they are already sitting here, and it is like 50% of the work is done, they are already interested. But normal people do not even understand why they are interested, because more or less their life works. But for once you have the interest, these three types of people, they are what normal people would be, and you start to explain or tell them about other aspects, they lose interest, they do not understand why, and they say: “Well, no, not at another time I look”, and they do not continue on their way to Monero. They would be like normal people want to know, how to use it all, how to receive, how to send and where, how not to lose the Monero they have in their wallets.

And then there are techies or the nerds, who want to know, they know something about crypto, and want to know how does the blockchain work, how does this work and how does the consensus work, and many other “how”. And you can talk for hours, and they are passionate about the subject.

And then you have the most philosophical part of the activists that concerned a lot with the issue of privacy. They know nothing about the other, and you only tell them if it is useful for their use, for their use case, if it protects them.

So well, these are the resources. It was Armando. I were to explain Zero Money to a person. It starts in 2013, that was 2013 for that we position ourselves to put in. That is the year that the white paper from CryptoNote came out. Those who were there yesterday at the beginning, there was a very special guest here, who was from the beginning of the topic. And in 2013 a white paper came out that was written by a person who called himself Nicolas Van Saberhagen, which talks about the rules to create a new currency.

Remember that in 2008, I am going to use many technologies with respect to Bitcoin, because what happens to me is that once you start talking about technical things I saw what the only one of that people understand, and so you want to talk only about Monero, and they ask you how is it compared to Bitcoin, how does Bitcoin do it? Sometimes it is easy, or you have already heard some things, but it’s like different.

In the white paper Nicolas in the beginning puts the introduction that Bitcoin has some flaws that cannot be fixed, and that the model is inflexible as the rules that Bitcoin proposes, and it is better to start from scratch with a new thing instead of continuing to propose to fix it, and changing, and changing, and changing it. And that’s why they decided to start CryptoNote.

And at that time that was basically the only thing that was important in Bitcoin that made very good progress, than what people recognized, it was digital, scarce, decentralized, uncensorable, at least technically uncensorable, well I’m going to talk a little about that, and Bitcoin was much better at that time than what existed before. That’s why it was kind of good. And now why are you going to replace Bitcoin with Monero? At that time what I had to do was to compare it with fiat money, common money, dollars, euros, yen, whatever, and to tell that Bitcoin brings all these new features that the others didn’t have, so it seems like the solution for all of them.

And in the white paper, and I use those terms in English, because it doesn’t work much for me translating many of the terms into Spanish that you hear in crypto, because people listen to them, understand them perfectly, and then when they go to look for resources or go online, to a forum, they don’t understand what they’re talking about. Nobody says ‘chain of blocks’, everyone says ‘blockchain’, everyone says the ‘white paper’. So I’m going to use them that way so that they also get used to understanding it that way.

The white paper sounds very technical, basically it’s a PDF and I explain it that way to people. It is a PDF written in text that says the rules to play a game. The analogy of the game helped me a lot for people to understand how cryptocurrency works, especially since it does not have a centralized entity that manages it. So the white paper basically says that the rules are like this, that it’s like a game. The white paper comes with the instructions in the game that almost no one reads until someone fights and they don’t agree on who is winning who isn’t there it is read there. But the rules have to be clear. If the rules are not clear, you are not playing the same game and if the white paper rules are not followed, you are not talking about the same currency, or you are not being able to interact with other people who are using that currency.

It is important to understand for people who want to see how currencies work, because then what happens when you are in the crypto environment is that they question themselves all the time what are those rules? Actually we are talking about it all the time when you talk about proof-of-work, when you talk about how fast it is, how scalable it is - that are all the rules of games like this.

In the case of CryptoNote, it started with some rules. Now let’s go on a bit on short history of Monero, and how we got there, why not exactly CryptoNote is not Monero.

The first currency that was made with CryptoNote was Bytecoin. When the decided what will be it’s logo, there was Bitcoin, so they put Bytecoin, to me it does not seem extremely creative as a name, but there are Adibas shoes, so maybe it works, I don’t know. It is a good strategy.

For reasons that I’m not going to go into it now, they explained it a bit well, Bytecoin, basically I say that it was a scam for some reasons, and from Bytecoin it later drifted to another currency that was BitMonero, currency in Esperanto. So it is something very nice. If someone asks you what they wanted to say with that, it is a language invented about a hundred years ago with the idea that everyone would speak the same. And obviously like all standards generally they do not work, they don’t adopt them, but it is good in theory. The idea of ​​Bytecoin reaches BitMonero. BitMonero also had its problems, I think you have to put the winner. Basically other people got angry, they said we are going to copy Bytecoin, we are going to buy the whole BitMonero and start over. And it is what we know today about Monero that would be like the brief story of how Monero came to be.

Monero is known like online or at least in the discussions, that it is the best Monero meme I know is the one that everyone is talking about that crypto works well and enters as a say: “No, but it has to be private, no but it has to be fungible, fungible!” And the Monero people are breaking the balls to do this. But it is a bit like that we already had that. We had reached level three with Bitcoin, and Monero is level four, no? In this way, the Monero people understand what is being talked about here, you already have the digital, the scarce, the decentralized, the uncensorable, but Moreno comes to say that it must be private and fungible as well. And that is not negotiable.

Why? Because what Monero deals with is of being good, effective, digital cash. That is what they are going to hear all the time digital сash, and to do that you need those two conditions. Here where people say “Good, but cryptocurrencies are no longer like that”, because the truth is that, we are going to be honest, compared to the currency, I say of money, sorry, those money we use all day, almost any crypto seems better. It’s not a very low bar. but that’s where it starts like this. Well, but you don’t dress like that. Well as Bitcoin the gay analogy works for me, is that it is as if it were and more people than in the safe deposit boxes of your bank were made of bulletproof glass, with which it is very safe it is very difficult to steal them - you see them there, but you see your money is absolutely transparent all the time for everyone.

This is the moment when I see the face change for the first time in people, when they hear it. I say it’s really as if imagine how good in each country, they call it different, but you will say your bank account number for someone to transfer to you, and the moment you give it to that person, with that number they can see your entire balance, and there may be previous transactions you made in your bank account, and they can see the ones you are going to do in the future. And the question is 90% of the time: “Is it serious? Is it like that?” Yes, it’s like that. And that’s when they begin to understand: “Ah, ok, tell me a little more”.

And the other one that seems absolutely absurd and it works very well is with an email account, imagine that to all the people who give them an email account of yours, that normally so, that they can send something to them, the moment they have it they can see all the emails they received before, and all those who have the box, and all those who are going to send in the future. And that makes them very nervous. And that’s a good hook that they start to get interested in: “Ah, ok, there’s a coin that works differently. Tell me more about that”.

Keep on talking about privacy, Monero does things a little different. This is like the most normal image, because what happens is that especially in Latin America we are very used to privacy being something very asymmetric to governments and certain institutions being very opaque with their money management. So this is an almost psychological opinion of mine.

So we are like more predisposed even though we have an incredibly large black market, and we understand the value of the black market, we are very predisposed to: “Ok, the big fish have privacy, we don’t”, so we level everything down. It doesn’t seem so bad the idea that everything is public, and in a way we will be able keep the powerful at bay. Unfortunately this is not the case, because there will always be tools for governments and for people with a lot of funds to be able to protect their privacy. It is the little ones who are going to suffer from the lack of privacy. And when you say this, and this is the famous one: “Well, but if I have nothing to hide, I didn’t do anything wrong, I have nothing to hide”. Well, yes. And here comes the photo of the toilet - everything is fine, they are great privacy, not at least one men stop backs, and we floor one next to the other, and no one bothers him too much. but do number two next to a stranger - I don’t know, it’s strange and it’s starting to break a bit the practical application of that, kind of utopia of bread optics that we all look at this.

So well, think that this obviously does not work in real life, and that is why a feature that for me is beautiful of Monero is one of the best the ones, that I like the most, is that it is private by default. It is very democratizing this is a giant leveler - there are good privacy solutions, there are very technical things not only in crypto in other things, that are spectacular and very difficult to use, and require you to be a technical person. Monero is private by default. I am not going to say that it’s 100% the same for all people, but the level of privacy that my grandmother gets if I convince her to use Monero is very similar to that of a level 4 Russian hacker using Monero.

And that’s for me one of the best features it has. But it add one that you will find many questions, but well but it is not very practical. Well the privacy of Monero is also optional. What does it mean for everyone - unless you need to show something, and this in everyday life is practical, because for example if everything is so secret and so private, when you receive or send Monero to another person it is almost difficult to prove that you did it. When you open a Monero wallet and you see money coming in, you don’t know who sent it. We have put a person in front of you and you don’t know if the money that the person who just paid you just brought or not. Then there is a technical way to verify and for the other person to lose their privacy for a moment and say: “This is me, and this was me, and I can prove it to you”. So it exists in Monero, that’s why it’s optional.

Another very useful example that I really like to put it in this case - you can make wallets in which with the view key you can see all the transactions entering. And as for me, it’s also very powerful. The most obvious thing there will be organizations that are a bit controversial, like WikiLeaks or like The Truckers in Canada, who had problems with Bitcoin and all that stuff, but even at a smaller level than we have in Monerujo in development in our wallet of the donations that users make is public, it is open - you can see how many coins we receive from users. The great, mega wallet of the Monero General Fund for development is public too, but it protects the people who donate. It is not necessary give up their privacy, so you can audit how many funds they receive, but it protects the people who want to donate to that cause.

And something even more important to me that is not the first thing that is thought is that it protects the people who are behind that, not only that they receive it the first moment. Ask them to make an organization that they want for journalists who are in countries that are in danger, because they are authoritarian regimes, organization, but the citizens are going to be afraid to donate, because they are under an authoritarian regime, but since they are protected then they can donate with peace of mind that these transactions will not return to them. The people of the organization can receive them calmly, because they do not identify them, but above all, it will also protect the people who receive the money from that organization, the journalists finally. So that is a excellent use of why is it optional.

Then Monero privacy works more or less like this. This is a more basic scheme of privacy as if it were Alice and Bob, the one who sends the amount the one who receives, there is also monetizador - pum! - protects the three parties. When I explain this privacy, we do it like this.

And the other very cute concept of the matter is the issue of fungibility. Nobody heard that unless they are an economist or is in crypto. Nobody heard that word before. Never. We do not have a better word to use than that one. So it’s better that they learn it when they have to teach it, and then: “Ah, I already understood, I understood”. And well, among many coffee talks about it, but basically about fungibility, the way I explain it to people who enter first to Monero is that every unit, each unit of a thing is replaceable among themselves. I indistinct these chairs there, I do not care what they are used for. Maybe they are broken, you can exchange it for the other, so that you sit, and it works the same.

The example with sugar is that if I ask the neighbor for sugar and I have to return a cup of sugar, when I return it to him, I see him see a cup of sugar, hopefully if not it is ugly, but I don’t need to return the same sugar, because it works as sugar.

And in the case of fiat money bills are the same. Thing happens with a little trick on the bills they told me - bills are not all the same, they all have different numbers. Yes, it is true. Technically they are not fungible, but they are fungible by law, that is if you are under the law of a government, the government obliges you to accept each bill as long as it is in good enough condition, has the same value as another. If they lend me 100 with a 100 bill, when I return them with luck I only need to look for another 100 bill. You can’t demand that I look for the same bill that you lent me so that I can return it to you. People in general aren’t used to thinking about this, they say: “Oh, of course, yes, obviously”. Well, art is not fungible. If someone gives me Mona Lisa, I can’t return, I don’t know, Van Gogh’s sunflowers - it’s not the same, maybe a good deal, but the bills are not the same. Yes Monero tries to do that digital bills now.

For what price is there fungibility? When they are interested in this level two, is how it works a bit, this is a basic scheme in which you have wallets or accounts, however you want to see it, the boxes are the coins inside the boxes, and we spend them transacting with each other - in the case of Monero privately, in the case of Bitcoin and other cryptos in a public way. This is an explanation of the important system. And the exchanges, for example,  or organizations with much Monero do it in the mass.

And everything is fine, and they are all the same people tend to think that it doesn’t matter to me, when I charge a Bitcoin right now that they give me Bitcoin, what happens is that this can happen and this happens in real life, that for example a hacker here it steals all the coins from the exchange. And since the coins are identifiable, like the movies when the bank is robbed, and they say: “No, but we put ink on the bills and we are going to trace them”. If those Bitcoins start to get dirty, we are going to use Bitcoin as an analogy, at the time they were stolen, they know exactly which Bitcoins were stolen, and which ones weren’t. So they identify this account that is in red, now it’s a hacker who stole the Bitcoins. All good, I’m not interested, because this happens - the hacker starts selling his Bitcoins to make a living, to buy their coffees, buy it without knowing it - I already had two, now I have threeб one is tainted, well I don’t care, it looks the same in the balance of the wallet, it’s the same, it’s a Bitcoin. I have three, I’m happy.

Everything ends in a moment, happening with this - I sell it or give it to someone with bad luck, who does have a list of all the Bitcoins that were stolen from one side. So what begins to happen is that in the best of cases they say: “I don’t accept them”. They are not interested in Bitcoins that have come from an illegal. Level two is I do not accept them and I close the account, because clearly you had to do with a strange operation. Level three and it would be no reason to think that you are not the same person who was robbed Bitcoins at first. So you are a suspect.

But what ends up happening with respect to fungibility to price. What this shows you is that Bitcoins are equal to each other at least in value, that is what begins to happen to fungibility are not fungible the same ones, a Bitcoin that comes in a tainted transaction in the best of cases and you can sell it, the most logical thing is that they buy them from me at less value. It is what happens for example in Argentina and many other places, for example I put it there because it is where I come from. With dollar bills, everyone saves in dollars, because Argentine pesos are not useful for much, but unlike in the United States, the bills that are worth more or the bills that are in the best condition and they are newer, if you want to sell old dollars, it happens here in Mexico, also in the exchange houses, they tell you no if they are from more than 10 years ago what changes the design. In others I accept and if they are from the previous ones I accept them, but with 10% less. So I can believe that dollars are not fungible in some countries. Monero is exchangeable, since currency does not carry the history of previous transactions, and you could be receiving the Monero from a hacker who is the same as another…

_We apologize for the abrupt interruption. Unfortunately, due to a power source issue, there was a brief disconnection during the online stream._

…who issues Monero, how to do it? No, there is no company, the quick way is in no company that sells Monero, there is no office in Monero, there is no official Monero site, there is no Monero stamp, there is no one to complain to, if you have a problem with Monero. It is a fairly open community of people with a common interest in making digital cash on the internet. If you are interested you can participate, you can discuss. There is more or less small group of developers, who decide to implement new things, there is one more group - great developers who contribute and make proposals, and have ideas to discuss. Sometimes it looks more like the photo below, civilized, very technical, sometimes looks more like the photo above.

But the results so far Monero is nine years and continuing, and it’s working, and it is the most widely used privacy-focused coin of all. It is also decentralized at the node level, no one who is an end user is interested in the existence of nodes, that is a difficult thing to explain, but basically, they did understand that there was a list of transactions that were shared among all, if they know it, especially about Bitcoin. But if you don’t explain to them that every time they send money to someone, the list is written down, we share it among all of us, so that not a single person who can cheat and score Monero for herself. Then we all share it, we all check that we all have the same list, she does it on computers and these computers are distributed all over the world, because the other one they tell you is always: “Good, but if it’s in insert such a country, they are never going to allow this to work’. So no good, but there are ways in almost every country that is everywhere. So the risks of legal jurisdictions, that some people get off, that the power goes out, in an entire continent you have another four left. I don’t know if there is an Antarctic.

And the other great pride of decentralization of Monero is mining. I don’t go to something mining I explain to you generally now not because we are half the rest of time, but what I tell you is that the way in which, for example, that I saw with mining that uses electricity. I will briefly explain that creating Monero comes out of money, because you have to put electricity and machines to produce it, and those miners, those computers that are around the world, are only in charge, they are like the police of the game. They are the ones who verify that when you want to send money to him it is true that he is well, they write down or that there exists at least, they are now another node and they distribute it in the list among which we all have. That work is paid in the network of Monero, and Monero does not pay by issuing a little bit as a reward for the people who run those machines.

The decentralization part comes from the fact that when you use an algorithm that is always the same, the way in which those miners receive prizes is basically guessing a very large number, hard all the time, testing, testing, testing, until they guess. If you always use the same rule to guess, people build very efficient machines to do it. The more efficient those machines are the more you decentralize into the better ones that produce those machines, then you start to lose that beautiful distribution that you had before, and in the end - well, yes, we are all everywhere, but there are three or four policemen who have power, and if they agree among themselves, the game is also broken.

Monero decentralizes with RandomX - another pride of the community until a while ago. I had been trying to do it for a couple of years, I was changing the algorithm every time, working on RandomX so far it has been working very well. It makes that riddle that the miner has to do change randomly all the time, so you can’t build a very efficient machine, much better than others.

And I’m going to pass this quickly. How many time we have|? Well. The last thing I’m saying is the one that interests everyone a lot: “It’s good but, how many are there, because I know that Bitcoin has 21 million?” And I’m going to say: “Well, they’re 18”. So it makes them happy, and after that they say “But how?” And the explanation that comes, it requires a little mental effort from people, but you explain to them that if you already explained to them about the miners, you tell them that basically you need to make sure that you have some money in some way to pay those miners in perpetuity forever. Otherwise there is no incentive to continue doing so. So Monero has already issued the original 18 and it is working with an emission that is every two minutes zero point six Monero that is from the winning mining prize in this way from here for you will always have some reward for running that machine that verifies transactions all the time.

In the case of Bitcoin, for example, it is debatable that when they took out those 21 million, people say good so you can see, eliminating the miners. People who know about say that they also receive, but they receive commissions for each transaction, so that will work the same, but you say: “Well, ok, if that’s the case, what will happen is that if their opinion only depends on the transactions made by people who want to send money in one way or another, but you take all the other income, those commissions will have to support all their expenses, and they will be very expensive, and when the commissions rise, these commissions will discourage people from sending coins to each other, which is a kind of spiral of death of mining”.

So that is the way that I explain these things, and to finish a bit of the angle of why Monero manages to do all those things. It is my opinion that because - there were a few more things, but without slides they do not make sense - it is in my opinion that what we are seeing is the disappearance of effective money. It does not seem to me that it is very controversial to say that all the good things that digitization brought, such as, for example, we all know each other here and we all come from different places as well, makes it very attractive to centralize this money. And money is the language that we invent almost universally everywhere to be able to convey what is valuable to each one of us. And if someone questions you about that, explain to them why if you have to sell the same model used car, but if you fixed the car, it’s nice, it’s clean, you have it view your dad gave it to you, when you sell it you’re going to put a much higher price on it, because the car would have left you standing on the street five times, you know, what you took the mechanic fourteen times, and you already want to take it off. It’s a betting way with the price you put, you are transmitting what is valuable to you.

And with cash we are very used to moving that way more freely at the moment than that disappear, we are going to begin to lose the ability to transmit what is valuable to us. And I think that this is going to be something very bad for society in general to greatly distort what is valuable to us. So it is good that we all know what we know how to do, still do know how to program others, know how to draw others, know how to speak, whatever. Let’s help, so that when that moment is closing and closing, and closing more and more, there is a viable alternative that is understandable and working to counteract this trend. That is what for at least it motivates me to try to do the things I do.

So thank you very much for listening to me. I hope you understood in Spanish some of what I said. Thanks to Doug and Sunita for inviting me, and especially thanks to the rest of the team Monorujo who made it possible together with the people who donate to our fund for me to be here so far from home.

_**Doug:**_ Well, will we have one or two questions?

_**Audience:**_ Well, I just want to know his social networks.

_**Andrés:**_ She was asking what my social networks are. Generally the same in Rey and everything that has to do with Monero, or even my personal is ‘anhdrs’. There you can find me.

_**Doug:**_ Just we are gonna be quick enough. We had some issues with power here, I’m sure you have noticed. Are we going to do switch over to another power source? That’s going to happen any moment now. You are going to do that, yeah? Ok.

So, those, who are watching at home, you’ll have to see blank screen for a while, but the stream will stay alive, it should be. We’ll be back for a while. So stick with us those, who are at home. The stream link will remain. You’ll just won’t see anything for a while.

Any other questions here?

_**Francisco Cabanas (ArticMine):**_ I have two questions. The first is what name is used for tail emission in Spanish? Least emission?

_**Andrés:**_ […]

_**Francisco Cabanas (ArticMine):**_ Minimum emission?

_**Andrés:**_ […]

_**Doug:**_ I don’t think people will hear you. Anything else?

_**Andrés:**_ Any other questions? No? Thank you.

_**Doug:**_ So now we will take a five minute brake just to fix the power situation.

_**Andrés:**_ Only one thing - we had a basic Monero workshop for anyone who wanted to start in practice how to download a wallet, how to send, how to receive, privacy suggestions, security suggestions also in the workshops. I was going to do today at last minute, I think it won’t make much sense, because it’s around eight, but tomorrow during the day if he’s interested I’ll be in the workshop area, if you need Spanish help with that, we’ll see you later.

_**Doug:**_ Good point, good point. Can you tell about the park or bazaar?  So, who here actually is a Spanish speaker? You are listening to Monero 101 talk, you’re actually advanced Monero user or ready Monero user Spanish speakers? Do anybody want to help us on onboarding the bazaar to Monero? So we have people right now walking around, some of them are ready to be onboarded, to come to the conference abnd just to onboard others, and is there anyone to help us with that. We are just going out to the vendors, we are get them to download the wallet, we’re sending them a few dollars in Monero. And then the idea is that people here in the conference will be ready to go and spend Monero and buy things from the bazaar. Anyone wants to help and just come up with me?

Ok, we’re going to have a five minute break. Thank you so much.
