# Justin Berman

_**View Balance Keys: A Private Key to View Incoming & Outgoing Transactions**_

[https://youtu.be/dw6GKFhKKBE](https://youtu.be/dw6GKFhKKBE)

---

_**Doug:**_ So next up is Justin Berman. He’s going to be giving a talk… what is the title of your talk?

_**Justin:**_ View balance keys.

_**Doug:**_ So for those of you that are just learning about Monero, this might be a little bit more advanced, but it’s good, you know. Stick around and try to see what you can pick up. Is it going to be very advanced?

_**Justin:**_ I’m going to try and ease it. So like I’ll start with the whole primer on ring signatures and all that. I’ll try and bring everybody along, even if you don’t know anything about Monero.

_**Doug:**_ Ok, great. Next up Justin. Justin, take it away, man.

_**Justin:**_ Thank you very much.

So today I’m talking about a view balance keys, which are a private key that you control, that lets you see all of your incoming and your outgoing transactions, but not be able to spend. So you can have this one private key that sees everything that happens in your wallet, but can’t spend from it.

So today in Monero we have private view keys which are different than the view balance key in that they only let you see the incoming funds into a wallet, and then you need your spend key to then determine when you’ve spent the money that you’ve received. So and the spend key is also used to, of course, spend.

So quick intro on myself. My name is Justin Berman, I go by JBerman on the internet, and I’ve been contributing to Monero full-time, community funded for the past a little over a year and a half now.

So we will dig right into these view balance keys and say other things.

So, ok, a bit more background to view balance keys. So the plan for them is to be included in a potential upgrade to Monero that is in the works called Seraphis/Jamtis. So it’s not something that exists today, it’s something that would exist in the future. And as it turns out, they seem to be the most controversial aspect or one of the most controversial aspects about the upgrade, that some people have voiced some negative opinions on the internet. So the idea with this talk I’m hoping is to provide a deeper analysis to help people understand that they actually do make a lot of sense, and the negatives are a bit overblown, especially when you compare them to today’s view keys, and the upsides are pretty huge. So that’s the main takeaway that I’m hoping people get from this talk, and so we will get there.

We don’t need the slides section anyway, so…

The next thing I want to talk about - a nice little primer on ring signatures, which will be way more relevant later on in the presentation, so ring signatures are used in Monero to provide sender privacy when you send your Monero. So basically, let’s say, you receive your Monero on Monday and you go spend it on Tuesday. So what happens on Tuesday - you have your wallet software that is sending this Monero, and what it does is it references your Monero that you received the day prior, on Monday, and then goes across the blockchain and chooses 15 other Monero outputs that anyone else has received, could be anyone random, and it includes those in a ring along with your one Monero output that you received on Monday, and so no one would then be able to tell, when they see your Monero transaction go on the blockchain, which one of the 16 ring members in the ring is yours. So yours is one of 16. And also important to note in that is that anybody else, when they’re constructing their Monero transactions, will be able to include yours in theirs as well. So anyone observing the Monero blockchain is not able to tell when you spend your Monero. So that is how ring signatures protect sender privacy.

And so now bringing it back over to view balance keys and some more context into their existence… so we went through this slide… So Seraphis and Jamtis are currently in the works as the proposed upgrade to Monero code in the back for over here is kind of the brains behind the Seraphis, and tevador brains behind Jamtis.

So the basic, I mean, the whole premise in the first place of Seraphis and the exploration of it was to find a way to increase Monero’s ring size on a significant amount. The idea is to increase them from 16, so you’re not including 15 others in your transactions, and increase that ring size to 128. So you’d be one of 128 when you spend your Monero.

So you can read more about Seraphis that first link there, and tevador’s Jamtis spec is in that second link, and then I also gave a presentation at Monerokon that gave what I thought are like the major features included in Seraphis, and I did a kind of high level overview of each of those features and ran through them. And view balance keys were one of those that I touched on in this slide, so there is a bit of repetitive stuff that will be, that I’m getting to in the beginning of this presentation. But again, the main idea that I’m going to be getting at today is that I think they are very, very useful tools that pretty much minimal downsides, practical downsides when you compare them to Monero’s existing view keys today. I’ll give a deeper analysis on that too.

So we’re gonna I’m gonna start with ‘pros and cons’, and then I’m going to get into an analysis of today’s view keys and how they work, and highlight some issues surrounding today’s view keys and some privacy aspects to it. Then get into some Hypothetical Seraphis view keys - so when the ring size actually increases a significant amount, what view keys that can only see incoming funds would look like in that context? And then in some hypothetical, in the way future of Monero, hopefully sooner rather than later, when we have a full chain membership proofs, meaning that the ring size isn’t necessarily just one of 128, but spans the entire blockchain, so when you spend Monero you’re among the set of all Monero that’s ever been received in the past. So I’m going to talk about view keys and how they would exist in that context as they exist today, and then get back to the conclusion.

So some pros. So probably the most significant pro of a view balance key, or one of the most significant I’d say, they enable a fully featured and a safer, more secure watch-only wallet. You could have a watch-only wallet that exists somewhere on some hot device, on your computer, somewhere that you are not as secure about, and then your cold wallet signing device that is maybe could be your hardware wallet or some air gap device that you are keeping secure, closed off from the internet ever connected, that only is able to spend, and then your watch-only wallet sees all the incoming Monero you’ve received.

Now with today’s watch-only wallets because the incoming view key only sees incomings it can’t calculate your balance correctly without pulling in information that your spend key helps to provide. So at some point you then have to load your spend key on some device, load it, maybe you have your spend key in some cold storage somewhere sitting that you don’t want to touch for a long time, which is the optimal secure setup. So what a view balance key would provide is your ability to have this watch-only wallet that you would never have to consult your spend key and use it to be able to have this watch-only wallet that can tell everything that’s happening in your wallet. And the watch-only wallet today is the UX experience is kind of a pain, where you have to be loading that device and going back and forth loading information from your watch-only wallet, to your cold wallet, back to the watch-only, and the view balance keys would solve all that. And it’s a similar solution for both hardware wallets and multisig, and the improvements they provide in those context. So with a hardware wallet they have to be implemented in this way to pass this information from the hardware wallet back to the computer, back to the app, and back to the hardware wallet. There’s all these extra steps involved that make the implementation trickier. And with a view balance key you could have that setting on your device and just cut out all the information that needs to be passed to the hardware wallet, where the hardware wallet can exist just to sign transactions and confirm the information that you’re spending in the transaction.

And then with multisig, so you can imagine a multisig, a multisignature transaction, or multisig setup would be for example a ‘two out of three’, so you have three people each with their own key, and you need two of those people to come together to be able to spend the Monero that’s in that wallet. One person is not able to unilaterally spend.

So with a view balance key, let’s say, for example, two people get together, they spend from that wallet, how does that third person know that Monero has been spent? They have no idea. So they’re sitting in the dark. But with a view balance key that third person is able to know this. And getting deeper into the weeds of how the multisig is implemented, you would need fewer communication rounds than the multisig, it simplifies the approach a significant amount. So it just improves user experiences in Monero pretty significant amount. And that to me are some of the biggest upsides to it.

So and then third, which I’m going to dig a lot deeper into later in this presentation, is that they have materially similar privacy properties to today’s view keys that can only see incoming transactions. So I’m going to lay out the argument and show some analysis for why today’s incoming view keys are actually, technically you are pretty much able to see a wallet’s balance using them in the vast majority of cases, and it’s probably might be something people are unaware of, so this is something that I’ll get into and demonstrate later on. The issue though is you can’t build an app that fully relies on it. You can’t build a wallet that is reliance on that caveat, because there are these tiny circumstances and these one-off like edge cases, where it wouldn’t work. And then I had a fourth point on there that was, I spoke on it at Monerokon, I just want to highlight it, the view balance key, I talked about a light wallet here and how the view balance key enables this new tier for Monero - it’s not exactly the case, it doesn’t strictly enable it, but the new light wallets here is related to view balance keys in a way. So I just striking that from the record over here and correcting that today.

So now I’m going to get into the cons of it. So it’s what people are saying that’s negative about these view balance keys. So essentially these view balance keys… eventually if once Monero does increase the ring size a pretty significant amount, the ability to determine a wallet’s balance and be able to see when someone is spending Monero using just the incoming view key will get a bit weaker, will get weaker. So people are arguing that maybe within that context a view balance key potentially is this one click thing that someone would then give up and unwittingly lose all their privacy. And so if that’s something obviously that is we wouldn’t want to happen, so that would be pretty bad. But I would argue and counter to that. For one with today’s incoming view keys it’s already a possible thing. You can already one click give up your wallet’s entire balance with complete certainty by giving up your view key and all of these key images included for all received outputs. So I mean it’s already technically possible to give that up, and you can imagine some service that if they’ve maybe require you to give up your view balance key in order to use their service, I mean why not just require that as well every time you want to use the service? So functionally I think they’re very similar. Now it is worth highlighting with the view balance key you don’t have the forward privacy. So with today’s view keys you give up that information on the spot, and then all they can see in the future is all your incomings and then make the pretty accurate guesses at your spends, but not know them for certain, like the user would have to then give up the key images. But regardless I’m going to argue later on and show that it doesn’t really matter how today’s view keys are implemented. No matter, it pretty much forever a user should is pretty much leaking their wallet’s balance with today’s incoming view key. And I’ll get to that.

The second potential outcome that people have highlighted and mentioned as a negative is potentially a service or wallet service that wants to offer the best user experience possible would collect users view balance keys, and then every time you load your app, your Monero wallet, it’s instantly ready to go. So if anyone’s used Monero you probably are definitely aware that, if you haven’t used it, and however long you haven’t used it, you have to sit and wait for it to sync, and essentially what that’s doing is decrypting every single transaction to see if it belongs to you since the last time you opened the wallet. So that is a bit of a pain, and then you also notice that if you have to restore your seed you initially created your wallet, you’ll notice you have to do that whole syncing process. So if some service were to exist that collected these view balance keys, there would be no syncing involved whatsoever.

This is mitigated in the Seraphis/Jamtis design with a new light wallet tier. So these are essentially light wallets that do this like MyMonero today does this. So this new light wallet tier essentially offers that full benefit of instant loading with some pretty nice privacy properties, where that service can’t in all circumstances tell definitively when you receive or when you spend, can’t see your change. So functionally it gets that user experience and should provide that, will provide that user experience, and so there really would be no reason unless someone may be malicious for collecting these view balance keys in my view, because of the existence of this new tier. So koe also presented some arguments that I linked to here, you could read in that slide in that link as well.

So now I’m going to dig into today’s view keys. So if you recall today’s view keys, they only see incoming funds and not outgoing. And so what I’m going to show —we’re gonna walk through a sample transaction and I think this…

_[Disconnection]_

So here we have a sample transaction that happened in August 2022. And I did look at chain data for this stuff, but it’s not accurate stuff, I modified it - there’s no identifying information in this. But it’s close to pretty much accurate for what might have happened.

So you have one input… So, what basically happened, what we’re going to say in this transaction is that a user received 10 Monero, and received it from some counterparty, and so on the input side they don’t know anything about where that Monero came from. And then on the output side we have two enotes, where the second one is, you know, where the user received 10 Monero, and the first one is presumably the change that went back to the sender.

So, enote2 and Transaction A is what we’re going to refer to this as. So here, if you recall from earlier in the talk, when I talked about ring signatures, so any other transaction that happens on chain, that happens 10 blocks after this user received their Monero. any single other transaction can include that Monero, that enote that you’ve received in their own transactions. So I looked at the chain and I looked at around the number of transactions that included this enote2, this hypothetical enote2 in their transactions as a ring member on their input side. So if you can see, for example, in the first one in the top left, you have this transaction that occurred in August 2022 as well. It had the enote2 from transaction A on the input side, and then no enotes on the output side that the view key is able to see. And now we have on this one yellow box highlighted here, we have this other green enote of 9.2 XMR, so the user definitively received 9.2 XMR in this transaction over here. There was one input in the transaction in that ring in that transaction had 16 ring members in it. One of those ring members was the users enote2.

So these are nine transactions here there, were about 14 when I looked at chain data, this was a number I found for how many times an enote would potentially be included in other transactions going up to a few days ago. So the latest one was March 2023.

So right now I’m on slide number 11 highlighting this suspect transaction, the one of fourteen, and so again this transaction had one input that included that enote2 from Transaction A on the input side. That was one of 16. The user received 9.2 XMR in this transaction. And now another important note - so since that time up until a couple days ago, this is since August 22 when this transaction was first received by the user, there have been about 4.6 million other transactions which could potentially have included this enote in them as an input side. So of those 4.6 million transactions we were able to narrow in on just 14 transactions that included it. And of those 14 only one did the user receive this 9.2 Monero in. So we can make a very highly educated guess that this 9.2 Monero that the user received in this transaction was the user’s change. And the user almost very, very, highly likely spent this 9.2, this 10 XMR output that they received prior, and so they must have spent 10 minus 9.2 that is 0.8 XMR. So this other enote2 in this transaction that is unknown, we can assume using just the incoming view key, that it is 0.8 XMR, and the user has now spent their prior enote, and that’s all just with the view key, the incoming view key today.

So I ran a simulation where I started from when this transaction enote was able to be included in other people’s transactions, and ran 100 simulations. And I found that the expected number was around 12, you could expect that 12 other transactions would include your enote as a ring member in their transactions. And the red line there is the actual of 14. So this darker turquoise line is kind of the distribution showing how many times other transactions include it. And that average that expected value there was around 12. So that stimulation is useful for now I’m going to talk about Seraphis.

So in Seraphis we’re going to increase the ring size from 16 to 128, is the current plan with Seraphis, and so I wanted to show hypothetically what would these incoming view keys look like with Seraphis, and would the incoming view keys in that circumstance be enough to protect spends and protect that information.

So I made some assumptions here. So going over these assumptions, because there are couple of pretty important. So one I assume the transaction volume will remain the same. So basically I ran this simulation starting from when this originating transaction in August 2022 existed, and then ran it up until a couple days ago, but instead of assuming that other ring sizes will be 16 in every single transaction, I assume they would be 128.

And a couple other assumptions I made that the selection algorithm for how other enotes are chosen and selected will remain the same, which is not going to be the case. But I don’t think the results would change too much, as a result I also didn’t use a cryptographically secure random number generator for this presentation, because it took a long time, so I just used Mersenne Twister. So you can take the results kind of with a grain of salt, but they about ballpark figures for what you would expect.

And so I found that when you increase the ring size to 128 it’s really just proportional 8 times 12. 96 as expected came out is 92 transactions. So basically you would expect that when the user received this enote in that transaction in August 22 that around 92 other transactions would include that enote in theirs once we bumped the ring size to 128.

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Justin:**_ I expect it to just be proportional, 128 over 16, so times eight which. It was about the case, it was a little under 12. So it pretty much turned out there. I also only did 100 simulations, but this is what you got. So basically an 8x increase of the expected number of other transactions, which would include yours as a ring member.

So, now 92 transactions out of 4.6 million is 0.002 percent. So that’s still a pretty small number. So this transaction still sticks out as just one of 92 in which the user received this enote. So you can see here is 92 transactions and there’s that one yellow, one that kind of sticks out among these 92, and then like this would be like a grain of sand relative to the all the transactions that have occurred.

So this that one suspect transaction from prior of ring size 16, it is still pretty suspect, we could still make a pretty strong assumption with just the incoming view key that the user has now spent 10 XMR in the transaction, received 9.2 as change.

So now you might ask what about hypothetical view keys in the future, when Monero no longer is using ring signatures which have a small subset of included as them as the on the input side, but instead reference all Monero that’s ever been received? How would they look in that context? So here’s some other future assumptions that we’re going to make here.

So in that case naturally we wouldn’t be able to narrow in on this subset and carve out this small number of transactions to look at and say: “Ok, did the user receive some Monero in that”. So that gets out of that the ability to do that.

Now we’re making some other assumptions here. Most people are going to be receiving their salaries in Monero. So salaries are generally larger payments made in some interval, like a bi-weekly interval, and so surely you must say that there would be then no case to tell when a user is spending, because this incoming key can’t see their outcome. And if that the case, I’m going to walk you through an example with our guy Bob here, and we are going to show, I’m going to show that this might not be the case.

So he’s receiving his salary first in the 15th of the month, so let’s say on May 1st he gets 50 000 piconeroes, and this is some point in the future, piconeroes are the smallest denomination of Monero, they are 12 zeros ahead, so it’s like one trillionth of Monero is one piconero. So he’s getting 50 50 000 piconeroes, which is a lot of money on May 1st, and he’s going to take that Monero on May 2nd, and he’s going to go to the store, and he’s going to buy milk for 42 piconeroes. And then on May 3rd he’s going to buy a hamburger for 316 piconeroes.

So what does this look like with the view key? So he receives the salary first day May 1st, 50 000 piconeroes, May 2nd he goes and buys some milk for 42 piconeroes - so what does this look like with the incoming view key, you still see this other enote in the transaction —that’s 49 900 something ignoring fees, piconeroes, and fees are public, so you can just subtract - it’s not really relevant, but basically you’ll see this value of 49 900 something that is pretty close to the 50 000 that the user received… knock someone out of their chair this is the stuff is riveting stuff. So 49 900 something, and then he goes and buys the hamburger with his Monero that he got from his salary. And now that comes out to 49 600 something piconeroes. And so this is what it looks like with an incoming view key. Now it’s pretty clear, it’s not as though Bob is receiving his entire salary every single day, May 1st, 2nd and 3rd. I mean, it’s a pretty easy deduction to conclude that Bob is probably spending a small amount of his salary on the next day, and then the day after. So even in this context of full chain membership groups where you can’t zero in on the input side, there is still a decent amount of information leakage, because of these change outputs.

And perhaps one could argue maybe there are some mitigations to this, like maybe Bob could receive his enotes in smaller denominations and so have tons of smaller enotes, and so spending from those enotes, so for example Bob gets 10 enotes of 5 000 piconeroes each, so when he goes and buys the milk it’s pulling from the 5 000, and so maybe this smaller Monero is something somebody else sent him of for 4 900 piconeroes. It could help in certain cases, but definitely has some drawbacks. For example, I mean, how do you know what’s the right denomination? How do you know how large or small to go? And that’s a difficult, and that’s dependent on market conditions. And then also naturally you have to put more enotes into the chain, which adds data to the chain. And it’s still not going to help in every circumstance, and so it’s probably still in Bob’s interest to assume that in his threat model if he’s giving up his view key he should still be assuming he’s leaking a lot of information about his fence.

So what a user maybe could do, as has been argued before, is maybe they could sweep every single enote that they’ve ever gotten and have no change ever, so that the view key would then not be able to tell exactly how much change was sent, because there is no change. But what if you want to buy milk? Then in that case you have all these enotes, and they’re not denominated in the right amount to be able to buy your milk. So then you’re screwed. So it just doesn’t work. It can’t work in that context.

And then how about a view key that can’t see a change? So different from today’s view key, a view key that is not able to see the change enote created in every transaction - and actually this tier is a part of the proposal of Seraphis and Jamtis to include this ‘View Received’ tier that can actually do exactly this - but the main point that I wanted to argue, and hope that you take away from this presentation, is that when we compare view balance keys, that can see all incoming and outgoing transactions, to today’s view keys, that can see only incoming with those caveats, I think the view balance key offers a significant upsides, and these drawbacks are from a privacy perspective, and the concerns that were raised, I view them as pretty minimal/impractical. And so for that reason I think that balance keys are pretty great.

Questions.

_**Audience:**_ Thank you. It’s a question I’d like to really ask to every single speaker is - we’re talking about all the opportunities about cryptocurrency, and what have you at the moment. I don’t think anyone’s addressed the whole digital ID, biometrics and potentially needing to use that to get online. And where crypto will be if and when they do that? To me it seems like it will just become a dead end. Welcome your thoughts.

_**Justin:**_ So in my defense for not covering that, I wanted to get into something a very particular thing, but anyway. So digital ID and thoughts on that being required everywhere - actually pretty, pretty interesting thing.

So a friend of mine asked me if I wanted to get a free “In-N-Out” time, and I’m from California, and so I’m like: “Yeah, sure who would have wanted free “In-N-Out”? I’m loving it”. So we go to “In-N-Out” and find out that to get the free “In-N-Out” you have to sign up for this app and scan your face to use it. and I didn’t do it that. That’s like I’m not doing that, it’s weird. But you can imagine these incentives at play that get people do it. I mean you just gotta say ‘no’ to that. It’s up to you, it’s up to people to not give in to that and to use technology. I mean I’d say I use cash and try to push for merchants to accept Monero, and to not go in that direction.

I mean crypto like Monero will never be designed as a system that requires an ID to use, like it’s never going to be baked into its protocol. It’s a permissionless system that…

_**Audience:**_ […]

_**Justin:**_ No I mean, yeah, what if the government requires everyone to sit in their pods all day and do nothing? Like there’s always like it’s up to us to say: “We don’t want that”, and to push for alternatives, and go to and spend your money in places where that’s not pushing in that direction. I think that the best thing we could do in working on Monero is to provide this alternative to that, where you have this money that’s not giving any information about yourself when you’re using it in different places, ideally with the best user experience possible that makes it easy for anyone to use and come to you who wants to go in that direction, and merchants to accept it, and like to push them in that direction, and build a better alternative to that potential future. I think that’s the best we can do. I don’t know, it’s ultimately gonna be up to people to say ‘no’, and in the social realm and political realm to stop that. And I think these tools in cryptocurrency as tools and promoting these circular economies, and that going to merchants is probably the best way to fight that long term, I think - build up businesses and build up these things that are hard to stop as they reach some critical mass. It’s my view.  _**Doug:**_

Nice, nice. Any other questions? Come on up, guys.

_**Audience:**_ Getting back to view keys, do you think that there’s a legitimate risk that we’ll just say shitty wallets will use the view balance key instead of a more proper lightweight wallet key with Seraphis just either due to incompetence or malice.

_**Justin:**_ You know, it’s possible. Yeah, I think, I mean, I said earlier like it could be a malicious wallet that comes along. But I mean a malicious wallet or an incompetent wallet can also collect your seed and also do that too. So ultimately it’s up to users to protect their seed and protect their private information, and make the conscious choice to use the wallets that prevent, that don’t do that. So I think, yeah, there’s risk to it, but I mean from the technical perspective of what that kind of wallet would provide to the user, and the whole point of this light wallet tier is to enable like still have some outlet of like there’d be no reason aside from incompetence or malice, like they won’t necessarily win, because they’re offering a better user experience that they’ll win on like I don’t know marketing spend or whatever. And people not caring.

_**Doug:**_ Follow up.

_**Audience:**_ One more question. So have you done an analysis yet where you’ve used the forthcoming Seraphis lightweight wallet scanning key, where there is some obfuscation built in, compared to the current view key, where you would try to do heuristics at investigating change in that case or have has that not been investigated?

_**Justin:**_  That wasn’t investigated in full. I’m hoping by Monerokon, it’s the talk that I’m gonna hopefully dig into at that, and hopefully I get to the point of digging in the analysis on that end. But there are other issues too. I mean, it’s not a perfect solution. I still wouldn’t say that this light wallet tier is protecting everything. I mean this light wallet server can be analyzing when you’re using the wallet, if the light wallet server at some point finds out about your address, it can, it will know your incoming, not your change, but I mean there’s still definitely some privacy caveats too. It wouldn’t be like the best. Still the ultimate recommendation is to be running your own node, and I would think a light wallet server or something along those lines.

_**Doug:**_ The heavy hitters got a lot of questions for you man.

_**Audience:**_ So as we’re discussing the privacy impacts of view keys, and how you claim, how view balance keys are not a significant real world privacy impact, the obvious question is why have your keys at all have the privacy impact?

_**Justin:**_ It’s true. I think that’s a discussion potentially worth having. I think the use cases, the benefits of being able to have a hot wallet that has no spend key in it is, you know, that is the most secure possible setup you can possibly have. So if you don’t have a view key like thing or if you don’t have a view balance like key, you lose the ability to have the most secure setup possible. So there are issues, but I think those benefits are pretty, pretty huge. Clarifying, I think the argument shouldn’t be that view keys as they exist today versus view balance keys, I don’t think like they’re the future parody is close enough with the benefits of view balance keys winning out. If any argument should be that. If there were an argument that would be my view.

_**Audience:**_ Hi, the question is, the two questions actually, first question - do you consider to have this view keys as some sort of public audit wallets, that, for example, some public organizations want to have a transparent funds, if you consider this as a legit use case? And if you consider it, how you see about the problem that those outputs that created by to these wallets, they became docsed. And do you think you should mark them somehow to exclude them from the set for the future transactions? _**Justin:**_

That’s it. Yeah. Ok, so first question on if I think it’s a valid use for some organization, some transparent organization to share this key and so then anybody can see the funds going in and out of that organization - yes I do think that’s a valid use case. For example, the Monero dev fund. I think that’s a public donation vehicle that people are sending Monero into it, it makes sense that people would want to know how that Monero that they’re sending into is being used by the dev fund, would want to know that it hasn’t been run off with. So that view balance key enables that, which is I think a valid use case.

Now the problem you mentioned of, now you’re able to tell when a lot of Monero is spent, and then this issue. So today you have your ring size of 16, and you’re one of 16. Now if anybody can see and knows which of these 16 others, the other 16 that your wallet has chosen are already spent, your ring size effectively decreases.

So Andrey was talking about the potential issue of, you know, you have these large organizations that could pollute the set, and maybe there’d be a way to exclude them from your wallet. It’s a discussion that’s come up. I’ve seen it, there’s a tool actually, the a black ball tool - you could blackball specific outputs, and you can prevent your wallet from ever using it. No one use it as far as we know - there’s talks to get rid of it. And there’s suggestion has come up in a lot of different contexts, recently in TX extra of excluding those enotes from it, potentially miners you know when they’re spent. I think that direction is a very difficult engineering direction to go, because the use cases just expand and expand.

So I think the best direction that we could head to, we could head in that’s the engineering solution is to increase the ring size as much as we can, prevent the issue from having it as material, an impact, and then eventually work towards the full chain membership proofs. It is the best direction, I think. I think otherwise we’ll end up spending a lot of time, cycles wasted on solutions that are just ever expanding and really difficult to maintain, and so with poor experience for the users too. _**Doug:**_

Great questions. Anybody else? I’ve got one more.

_**Audience:**_ Hi, Justin.

_**Justin:**_ Hello.

_**Audience:**_ Thank you for talk. I’m Paul from Zano team. I’m not sure, am I allowed to ask a very technical question, but I would like to you to elaborate a little bit about using two elliptical curves. I saw your Jamtis, you’re using curve 25519 and ed25519. Could you place all bright on this a little bit, and what would be downsides of using only one ed25519? Thank you.


_**Justin:**_ Sure, so the idea with using x25519 for a key exchange is that the speed up for key exchange is much more significant with x25519, so we can have a much more significant speed up on the scanning side, and as far as I understand, code would be able to give a better answer, and there’s a talk a bit later. But as far as I understand ed25519 is more performant for signatures, and then x2559 more performant for key exchange. So you know how you have all those ECDHs that while it has to do when scanning x25519 can provide a speed up of something pretty significant on that end. That’s the thinking behind it. _**Doug:**_

I’m tempted to allow these questions to keep on going, we’re getting all the heavy hitters here man. Any more big questions that we don’t want to miss? Anything? All right. Everybody let’s give it up for Justin Berman.

_**Justin:**_ Thank you.

_**Doug:**_ Thank you, man. Thank you so much.
