# Kapil Amarasinghe

_**Becoming Unapologetically Anonymousand Free With BasicSwap DEX**_

[https://youtu.be/6rNBT0RVA1M](https://youtu.be/6rNBT0RVA1M)

---

_**Doug:**_ Ok, we’re back for the second half of the third day. Feels like we’ve been here for a week, right? Which is a good thing. We got a lot done.

So next up is Dr. Kap of the Particl and BasicSwap teams. He’s going to be giving a talk on… what’s the title of the talk, Dr. Kap? Come on up. Title of the talk?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Hey, hey. Oh, thank you so much.

_**Doug:**_ What’s the title of the talk?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ So it’s “BasicSwap DEX and the Particl project — the road towards a decentralized nation state”.

_**Doug:**_ All right. Let’s give it up for Dr. Kap before he goes. A little motivation here. All right man, thank you so much for coming. Greatly appreciate it. And we also greatly appreciate the sponsorship that you guys gave for Monerotopia. As we’ve said, this is about bringing privacy tech projects together, and honestly this conference wouldn’t have happened if the privacy tech projects that got involved and helped contribute to making it possible. So greatly appreciate that.

_**Dr. Kap:**_ No problem, thank you.

Hi, my name’s Dr. Kapil Amarasinghe, and I’m pleased to be here today. First of all I’d like to thank Doug and Sunita from Monero Talk for organizing this event. It’s been a wonderful day of chatting with you all and meeting all the great minds working in the privacy space. And we’re really thankful for the invitations.

So for those that don’t know me yet, I’m an advisor for the Particl project and by extension BasicSwap DEX. And when I’m not doing crypto stuff — an emergency medicine consultant and doctor of 10 years standing. Firstly I’m very passionate about privacy and conscious of how critical it is for the preservation of our rights, living forward in a world growing increasingly more totalitarian day by day. And that is why I joined the Particl project as an advisor. But enough about me, that’s not what we’re here for.

Today we’re going to talk about BasicSwap DEX and its importance in providing Monero resilience. But we’re going to do that in a very specific context of a decentralized and independent economy that we’re all a vital part of. But before we jump into the crux of the presentation, let’s first get a bit of context about BasicSwap DEX by talking about Particl, and you’ll see that makes sense with everything we’re going to discuss.

So Particl is the mother project that built BasicSwap DEX. It can be best described as an ecosystem of privacy-first, pro-liberty and practical decentralized applications supported by a flexible and programmable privacy coin named PART. Particl itself uses RingCT as its privacy layer much like Monero does. But it has the particularity of using the Bitcoin code base as opposed to the CryptoNote code base, which makes it highly flexible and versatile so that it can be used in advanced centralized applications.

Particl’s mission is to contribute in building an open decentralized privacy-first and pro-liberty digital economy that’s fair to all, one that puts the individual at the very center — no corporations, no governance, no special interest groups or other similar centralized and power-hungry organizations. But for such an economy to be truly durable and frankly realistic and it’s in ambition to remain independent, it is imperative that it be as open, private and decentralized as possible. And we’ll see why as we progress through this presentation.

From a technical perspective Particl is composed of three main components. First — the Particl blockchain which is based on the latest version of the Bitcoin code base and its native cryptocurrency part, which is a privacy coin. Particl’s blockchain acts as the financial settlement layer of the ecosystem and provides some of its vital privacy technology.

Then we also have a distributed data layer. A mixnet or messaging layer, as some call it, but this the secure messaging network or SMSG for short. That component takes care of some of the more complex decentralized tasks within the ecosystem, but also the transfer and storage of data and messages across participants. That all happens off chain, because it’s a P2P Network that runs parallel to the blockchain, not directly on it, which prevents bloat and does not hinder the chain’s long-term scalability.

And finally the third main component of the ecosystem is the code architecture, which adopts a modular approach. However, this time the modular approach isn’t quite ready yet. This is one of our current development focuses, and we’re progressing through it in an iterative fashion.

And while the entire ecosystem and its apps are live on mainnet, we’re in the process of improving our code base to make it modular. The goal of this is to make the platform open to as many alternative coins and protocols as possible to make Particl dApps and decentralized services easily integratable with other platforms such as cryptocurrency wallets, third-party applications like Cake Wallet, for example, and we’re going to talk about this much more as we keep on going with the presentation. So keep this modular open approach in mind as it’s key and we will circle back to it shortly.

When combining these three components together you get a platform that can produce a host a wide array of privacy-first, pro-liberty decentralized applications that offer multi-coin support, such as Particl marketplace, a decentralized eBay-like marketplace, and BasicSwap DEX. And so let’s now cut to the chase, what is BasicSwap DEX.

BasicSwap DEX is Particl’s most recent decentralized application. It’s currently in an early public beta phase, and we haven’t promoted it too much yet, but we’re getting there. It’s a privacy first and cross-chain decentralized trading exchange that lets you swap there cryptocurrencies including Bitcoin Monero and others, such as Firo, without the use of any middleman or counterparty. It has a distributed order book on which anyone can publish or pick up offers, and charges no fees whatsoever other than the on-chain transaction fees of the coins you’re sending. There is also no KYC — you don’t need to create any accounts, it’s completely non-custodial, and imposes no limits or restrictions of any sort on you. It’s as free as can get free as in freedom, so you can do whatever the hell you want with it. There’s also no trust involved — it uses very secure atomic swaps, it’s 100% open source and auditable and can run locally on your computer. In terms of trading experience we’re trying to make it as user friendly as possible, which is always a challenge when building dApps that are uncompromisingly decentralized and private. But it’s vital for any sort of broad adoption, which is what we want to achieve always with building a fair digital economy for every human in mind.

So the story behind how BasicSwap DEX is born is quite interesting, and you’ll probably understand with it why we feel such a strong connection with Monero. That all goes back to Joe Gugger, sometimes more commonly known as h4sh3d, when he published his paper for Monero and Bitcoin atomic swap protocol that uses adaptive signatures as opposed to the traditional HTLC methods. This happened a few years back, when we were starting to think about opening up our marketplace dApp to other cryptocurrencies. In fact at that time we had run into a few challenges integrating third-party exchanges into it. As a result we were looking into a more sustainable private and decentralized solution. And one thing we really wanted to do is to have Monero as one of the payment options for our marketplace.

So Joel’s paper came at the right time. Given that the Particl coin is built on the Bitcoin coinbase it meant his work was also compatible with our ecosystem. This provided us with a great solution to work on a really forward-thinking Monero integration in the marketplace. And so this convergence of factors led us to begin work on BasicSwap, and after a lot of work here we are today with a public open beta.

From a technical perspective there are two main components in BasicSwap. The first one being that you can probably guess atomic swaps. An atomic swap, as I’m sure most of you know, is a type of protocol that allows you to make trustless and secure exchanges of cryptocurrencies and digital assets without the use of third parties.

In BasicSwap we have integrated two different atomic swap protocols. The first is the well-known HTLC protocol, which has been made popular by the deep red team. We often refer to this as regular atomic swaps. Unfortunately this type of swap does not allow for Monero to be swapped with other cryptocurrencies, because it requires both coins to have programmable outputs, which Monero does not possess.

The other type of swap which shall elegantly put together uses adapter signatures instead. These are zero knowledge proofs that allow Particl parties to commit to a secret without revealing it. They not only make it possible to swap Monero for Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, but they radically improve atomic swaps in general by adding a significant level of privacy to it. Indeed with regular HTLC swaps each swap creates a unique hash that is then permanently inscribed on the two participating blockchains. It then becomes easy for blockchain tracing systems to detect two identical hashes on two different blockchains and very similar timestamps, and infer that the owners of these two addresses conducted a swap together. Then the full amount and participants are revealed.

It’s easy to see how bad this can get now more than ever, especially with the advent of advanced AI technologies. Remember that information stored on public blockchain remains there forever, and having such crucial personal financial details for all to see is very damaging to one’s financial sovereignty. We already know that some blockchain tracing firms are integrating AI capabilities into their systems, and it’s only the beginning. Governments across the world are trying to ban and stop privacy and encryption technologies, and they’re cracking down hard on our rights and liberties.

Moving forward it only gets worse, and leaving information on public blockchains will be no better than using CBDCs or using the legacy financial system. Hence the absolute non-negotiable need for privacy in this economy that we’re all here for dedicating our lives to building. That’s also why we weren’t so big on this new type of atomic swap, and have adapted it to work on all other coins available on the BasicSwap DEX. This way they can benefit from a huge boost in privacy. There are still some technical requirements, namely the coin being offered has to be SegWit compatible that means that even if the coin isn’t SegWit enabled, it can still be swapped using adapter signatures as long as the other coin is.

Now atomic swaps themselves are not enough to build a DEX. All they do is swap. They do not provide DEX features or functions, nor can they help match swappers together. That’s where the second major component of BasicSwap, namely a distributed data layer, comes into play. This role is filled by SMSG, which I briefly mentioned earlier. SMSG broadcasts encrypted swap related data and messages across its network of nodes, and grants the DEX all the remaining features and functions it needs to operate as a proper usable dApp without overly complex and convoluted smart contracts.

In total it provides three main functions. First — it simplifies the process of atomically swapping digital assets by automating all the steps that usually need to be manually undertaken. And for those here that have dealt intimate manual atomic swaps — it’s a lot of commands to get through into a terminal, including specific transaction details with hashes. And then you have to send a bunch of information manually to an instant messaging or email service to the person you’re swapping with to complete all the required steps. And of course you have to find that person yourself, because atomic swaps alone do not do anything to find swap peers for you. It’s tedious, it’s clunky. And so the automation process is very much welcome, especially for any sort of consumer style adoption.

So with SMSG what we’ve basically done is automated all the steps involved within an atomic swap. And as long as your node remains online, all you have to do is either publish an order on the DEX’s order book, and wait for someone to pick it up, or pick one that’s available from someone else. And then the DEX using SMSG does the rest for you on autopilot, and you don’t have to manually do any of the six or so steps involved.

The other core function provided by SMSG is the provision of a distributed order book and some order matching capabilities. So there is indeed an order book on the BasicSwap what much like you would expect from a traditional centralized exchange, where you see different offers at different prices. Because BasicSwap is not like your typical AMM or smart contract, or multistig stacks, it allows you to put offers on the books at the price that you want to swap them for or pick offers from others at the price that you think is fair. You don’t have to trade at the last traded or average price from a liquidity pool which is what happens typically with AMM DEXs, which is definitely a viable approach especially in terms of liquidity. But it has its downsides as well notably from market makers, who almost always suffer from impermanent loss. So with our order book you can better plan your market making strategies and trade on your own terms. It’s a different approach and one we need as part of an array of other solutions.

It also makes BasicSwap potentially compatible with market making tools such as Humminbot or SelfLiquidity. Using those you can bridge your liquidity to centralized exchanges more easily, provide market making services to BasicSwap at no fee. Useful if you’re already providing liquidity elsewhere, because it provides good arbitrage opportunities. And although this adds a connection to centralized platforms, which some people may not like. It’s entirely optional, and it adds more choices for people who want them. Such compatibility with external market making tools is something we’re working on by the way. It’s not yet ready, but it’s in the works. So keep an eye out for that, if that’s something you’re interested in.

The third key function provided by SMSG is the propagation of swapper identities. So every swapper can have between one and an infinite number of unique identities on the network, and use that to let others know who they are. Each offer on the order book is attached to one such identity. You can also totally randomize that and have the DEX automatically create a new anonymous identity each time you publish or republish an offer. So you can either keep the same identity over time or stay anonymous. It’s up to you. And that’s one thing about Particl too. We like to provide users with choice. But that identity feature is particularly useful, if you want to trade in specific people or even avoid specific people, say if you’re worried about tainted coins, for example. We’ve got that covered, and you can ask us how at the end.

Another thing identities can help achieve is private OTCDs, OTC deals or what’s typically referred to as dark orders and dark pools in the OTC world. These dark pool orders are a special type of transaction in the financial world, in which a large OTC transaction takes place off the public record, typically to not create liquidity spikes. So what you can do is when you place an offer on the order book, either publish it for everyone to see, or only publish it for certain identities to be able to see it. For example, if you and I want to swap Bitcoin for Monero but only do it privately without putting this on the public order book, you can send me your identity, and when creating my offer I can specify that only you can see it. The offer will then appear on the order book, but only you’ll be able to see it. No one else. That way we can conduct a safe private OTC transaction and enjoy all the benefits of BasicSwap’s order book but without public exposure. So that’s a great way to make confidential transactions, and there’s just a large array of use cases that it’s useful, especially when it comes to transactions between Wales companies, enterprises and so on.

And so that’s the three main functions SMSG gives to BasicSwap, and when combined with atomic swap technology creates a revolutionary new DEX that is privacy-first, pro-liberty and unrestricted by nature.

Now to give you all a visual idea of what that actually looks like, we’ve got here a video demo of BasicSwap. Of course this is pre-recorded, but if you want to see it in real time, we’ll play around with it and test it out. Just come see us at our table at the privacy loft, we’ll be happy to show you how it works in a real live environment.

So as you can see the DEX works without fees or even in the monetization layer, and it’s open to any cryptocurrency. Right now we have Bitcoin, Monero, Firo, Dash, PIVX and of course PART. We’ve also got a large wish list of coins we want to add, but being an early beta means we also have a ton of other things to work on. And so we have to balance our time and resources between adding new coins and progressing the core architecture of the DEX. I know some here have expressed to us a desire to be listed, and we apologize we haven’t had the occasion to get back to that yet. But know that you’re on our wish list of high priority coins to add. In the meantime if you’re seeing this, have a coin and want it added to BasicSwap, please, do come see us at our table, and we’ll be happy to discuss. And of course because BasicSwap is open source, it is also possible to code your own integration. If you do, we’ll be happy to review and merge into our main branch.

And frankly there’s a lot of benefits to being added to BasicSwap. Really because it’s not a purely Particl DEX. It’s built by Particl, yes, and it serves a key function in our mission, but it’s really agnostic by nature. And you can use it for the benefit of your own project without using the Particl coin at all. And really this is why we want you to use BasicSwap, because we want it to serve as a bridge between each of our individual projects. Because this way we can truly build a resilient decentralized economy. But we’ll talk more about that in a bit.

Right now you need to know BasicSwap has a few limitations to you being in an early beta stage. For one, the application has to be manually compiled. It’s a mostly Python application, and you can build it using either a Docker setup or a more bare bones approach, which can be uniquely automated by some of the installation scripts we’ve got available.

There’s also the fact that you need to actually locally download and store the blockchains of each cryptocurrency you want to trade. Luckily BasicSwap is users pruned versions of blockchains. So it’s a good compromise, because it takes way less space on a hard drive, but also for the purest and those that care about total security and privacy, the manual is also the most secure way to set it up.

You also have to keep the SMSG node online for your offers to remain on the order book and for an atomic swap to progress through its steps. It’s all packaged though you don’t have to run multiple softwares, just keep BasicSwap running and everything’s taken care of for you. But it needs to remain up, because atomic swaps are a series of several steps that have to happen in chronological order. And of course you have to have your SMSG instance send the encrypted data to the network for the other party to know that you’ve completed a step. That’s all automated, but your node needs to remain online. An effective way to make that less of a burden is to run BasicSwap on a virtual private server, a remote server, cloud, or a dedicated box, like a Raspberry Pi. And you just keep that running 24/7. That’s what I personally do. I have my instance of BasicSwap running on a server with a market making script set up to automatically accept offers and adjust prices. So really I just keep that running and I don’t need to touch it once it’s set up.

In itself the setup process is a bit involved, but once it’s done it’s pretty straightforward and user friendly. Everybody here tonight should be able to do it. It’s really not that complicated. But for those that are a bit less technical like a typical consumer, this version of the beta might be a bit of a challenge.

Of course we have a strategy to fix all these limitations. We have a pretty clear path ahead, which is illustrated in our roadmap. Notably we want to make BasicSwap available on the web. And we have a few different ways that we want to go about it, such as navigating to a website using your favorite browser or by accessing BasicSwap through SMSG’s own upcoming web infrastructure. We also want to add quick swaps, in which you simply specify what ones you want to swap, and what amount, and the DEX that simulate to an AM exchange.

Then there’s version 2.0 of SMSG to increase the scalability of BasicSwap and make it available on its own network. We also have light nodes and remote services to make it super quick to set up with a local install, and, of course, and that’s absolutely vital, more coin integrations, because we want as many cryptocurrencies as possible available on our DEX.

Aside from all that, we also plan on releasing more advanced features. These includes market orders, taproot-shield swaps, that make swap transactions indistinguishable from regular cryptocurrency transactions, a sort of Local Bitcoin style offering board for OTC fiat transactions, we’ve even been exploring ordinal trading. We’re obviously open to suggestions, and if you’ve got any great ideas, then by all means reach out to us, and we’ll be happy to explore it.

Now why BasicSwap? Why have we built this thing and what do we want to achieve with it? There are three main reasons behind it. The first one is obvious. It is to enable you to freely trade digital assets in complete and total privacy without limits, restrictions, KYC or prejudice. But in truth it goes much deeper than that, and this is where we get into the second part of this presentation.

So what BasicSwap? We really want to enable the different crypto projects and especially privacy coins to be bridged together for the privacy-first dApps we build to be available across a wide range of coins. Because, you know, the cryptocurrency spaces are very fragmented environment. We’re all working on different ideas, approaches, concepts, technologies, and we’re all doing it independently within our own very loyal communities. And people in our communities can sometimes become a bit defensive or dismissive of other projects and communities. Ironically there is a fractured nature to the blockchain world, and of course as everything in life it’s not all bad or good — there are a few pros and cons to that.

The pros obviously is that this leads to more ideas being experimented on, more innovations. It also introduces more resiliency to the space, because if we work on something very groundbreaking, exotic and experimental, and it breaks, the damage can be better contained and it doesn’t have to impact other projects. This is all very much in line with the open source and cypherpunk ethos. So this is really something to be encouraged and celebrated.

But there are a few cons as well. It really creates tribalism — not always with the teams working on stuff, but in their communities. There are lots of really interesting and groundbreaking applications and services or ideas that have come or will come to exist but will go largely unnoticed or ignored, simply because it’s not coming from the project that users invested in financially or emotionally in. This really does a disservice to our common shared mission that brings us here today. In a similar vein it’s common for different teams to tackle the same challenges by adopting nearly identical solutions.

Unfortunately this approach can divert resources from areas where they could be better allocated, ultimately hindering the overall development and progressive critical technologies. But again this is a side effect of open source development and a decentralization of resources and efforts that are absolutely vital to the survival of our collective movement, especially given the sheer power of our adversaries. We all know how determined and unrelenting they are. But we really need more interconnectedness and interoperability in this space so that our efforts can be combined and compounded. We need to remain independent, we need to remain working on our own unique ideas, but there should be a better way to connect our projects together where there’s little friction as possible.

That’s a major part of why we built not only BasicSwap DEX but also designed our market place dApp in such a way as to eventually be offering multi-coin support. Because a decentralized, but strongly interconnected blockchain ecosystem is the key in creating a pro-liberty, privacy-first economy that is fair to all. And perhaps just as an importantly one that is resilient enough to sustain the attacks from the legacy system, which will absolutely be fighting back. Especially if our new ecosystem is determined to use privacy as the backbone of our future society. As I’ve mentioned they’re already talking about outright banning encryption in certain countries. Even in El Salvador, where Bitcoin is a legal tender, you cannot use Monero, because privacy and uncompromising freedom scares them beyond anything else. They are ramping up their efforts to attack privacy coins and put us into a fringe category even within the cryptocurrency industry, which they’re definitely trying to co-opt.

But building decentralized solutions that can connect each of our own efforts and projects together, цe become stronger and can stand a real chance of making the changes we’re all here for today. And so this is the more philosophical reason why we’ve built BasicSwap. You will know cryptocurrency go far on trading and speculation, which seems to be its primary use case right now. But here we all know it has a greater purpose in the liberation of humans moving forward. When Satoshi created Bitcoin and published its code it was meant as a destroyer of tyranny and a tool from which we could claim back our sovereignty, a free currency from which to create a pro-liberty trustless financial system built for the people. And this is at the very core of our mission at Particl, and the more philosophical driver behind us developing BasicSwap. Because it can absolutely act as a 100% private, decentralized pro-liberty solution that allows this decentralized economy to thrive and be better connected. Let’s give an example of how BasicSwap can help strengthen the free economy that we all set out to build.

So what’s at the core of every economy? Sound currencies? Sure. Means they’re transferring them? Yes. But what about commerce? A strangely generally overlooked use case for cryptocurrency in this space even as of today, not counting NFT market places, of course, which is another thing on its own. That’s why we’ve built Particl market place, which is Particl’s first dApp that came before the BasicSwap DEX, and has been live on mainnet for a few years now. Market place is a decentralized privacy-first an unrestricted two-side online market place, think like eBay but the Monero version of it. It allows two parties, individuals, businesses or even AI agents, or smart contracts, to securely buy and sell anything using cryptocurrencies without the need for any third-party or payment processor.

It runs autonomously on a distributed network of nodes just like any cryptocurrency like Monero or Bitcoin. Just from hearing that, I’m sure, you can come up with a ton of use cases for it, and it’s easy to see the benefits of such a market place, especially as we’re all big into privacy and pro-freedom tech. But here’s the caveat — it only works using Particl, because Particl actually has the technology to allow for a decentralized and anonymous two-party escrow system, combining both RingCT and CT technologies.

But this is precisely what I’ve been talking about for the past few minutes — we need better interoperability and interconnectedness, and this is precisely what BasicSwap was built for and what it does. As we move forward we will integrate BasicSwap into the Particl Marketplace directly, allowing your cryptocurrency to be able to use Particl Marketplace directly, essentially adding directly decentralized e-commerce capabilities to your project via a simple integration. And other than the obvious usability boost it gives, you can now buy and sell stuff using your favorite cryptocurrency without having to sell it to fiat using a payment processor or a centralized exchange.

Naturally this also introduces major privacy benefits. It basically lets you compound privacy technologies and create intricate chains of anonymity. Let’s say you want to buy a computer on Particl Marketplace, and you’re a Firo holder, and you want to spend that. The settlement layer is done in Part using both CT and RingCT, but you can specify if you want to use Firo to the Marketplace, and it will give you a fairer deposit address to which you can send a Lelantus transaction. BasicSwap will then swap it for Part for you and pay the seller with Part. And what you’ve essentially done is you’ve combined the powerful Alantis encryption tech, provided by the Firo coin, and that of RingCT plus CT because of the Particl portion of the transaction. And we certainly think that’s a massive use case.

And that’s just one example that shows how multi-coin support for a decentralized marketplace in the context of a privacy-first, pro-liberty economy goes way beyond just providing usability benefits. It really creates an incredible sense of privacy and resiliency against any sort of attack or AI blockchain tracing system.

But earlier I mentioned that we’re going through a massive improvement process for our dApps to make them more modular. That’s because the same way we’re working towards offering multi-coin support for dApps, we’re working to offer multi-protocol support for the components that power them. The benefit of this is that dApp developers will be able to mix and match different protocols to build their applications. A good example of that is using distributed data layers.

As I mentioned BasicSwap DEX uses the SMSG network data layer, but it would be possible to substitute it for another alternative such as Session, the xx Network or Nim, for example. The same goes for any other Particl dApp — you build what you want using the protocols that you think are best fitted for your particular use case, and then it offers an incredible level of flexibility and resiliency to privacy-first dApps. Let’s say a distributed data layer gets exploited or de-anonymized in some Black Swan event. Well, instead of the whole application being screwed, it would be possible to simply substitute the exploited data layer with another one that is effective in doing the job. Another example of modularity is the integration of various solutions within one application. Like I said BasicSwap will power the exchange of cryptocurrencies on Particl Marketplace that prevents us from adding other solutions as well, like Seri DEX for example.

More options means different sets of pros and cons which different users may value differently. It also gives more freedom and options for developers when building, so that they’re not forced to abide by the rigid constraints of a specific network or blockchain. They can build whatever in a way that’s best for them. And that’s a perfect example of different projects coming together in an interconnected way while still working independently on their own ideas. We don’t have to scrap what we do and start working as one team. Better interoperability between different networks does the job of bringing all of our independent efforts together in a coherent and practical way. And only when we are connected in unison we will be able to offer a truly resilient, free and pro-freedom economy for humanity. One that will be able to sustain the attacks of the legacy system much like individual cells within a larger organism. So this is what we do at Particl, and that’s why we built BasicSwap DEX.

We now stand at the crossroads especially with all the AI and tracing technologies coming to life. The aggressive crackdown on liberties from governments around the world, the financial system meltdown — our time is now, and we must stand united and connected. We must build a decentralized economy and privacy is an imperative for it. A decentralized digital economy without privacy is probably worse than even the legacy system. Web3 without privacy is worse than Web2, because everything is logged publicly on blockchains, and it’s already almost trivial for anyone curious enough, not just regulators, to trace it all down. That is really why we need all of us working on privacy technologies.

If the ideas we’ve discussed today resonate with you, and you share our vision, we invite you to join us in the most significant, ambition, and meaningful mission of our time. Let’s work together to build an unstoppable force for a privacy-first and unstoppably free privacy-centric economy. We can make it a reality. Together we can take a stand against totalitarian policies, CBDCs, rogue AI systems and other threats to privacy, security and freedom. So let’s make it happen and create a better world for ourselves and future generations. We are the ones that are made a conscious decision to make change happen, and when united we are a force to be reckoned with.

If you are a developer or open source contributor, or a journalist, or just someone who wants to know more, if you want to help us build this future in any way, shape, form or fashion, then by all means please see us at our booth later, and have a chat with us. We’d love to discuss all the ways we can build that better future for all of us and for the future of humanity. And if you are already involved with another project, then please keep going, don’t stop, don’t be discouraged by those that would benefit from you giving up. You are anchoring yourself on the right side of history right when it matters the most. Thank you all for your time, and again thank you Doug and Sunita for organizing this absolutely badass conference.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Thank you. So you can see the QR code there. Scan away — it’s going to link you into everything relevant to our project. And I think it’s time for a short Q&A.

_**Moderator:**_ All right, any questions?

_**Audience:**_ Hi, thank you for nice talk and hi from designer team. I have maybe some naive question. I noticed during your video, demo presentation, that user is allowed to select actually the signing algorithm. So user is allowed to select between signing like HTLC and AdapterSigs. So my question is —if I were your user, what I would expect and how should I select it?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ So this is the early beta version and we pay for our UI. we’ve given the choice of HTLC or adaptive signatures. We always recommend you use adaptive signatures, because what it essentially does, it takes the hash signatures of the transactions and moves them… it actually processes them on the SMSG mixnet, which effectively encrypts them. The adapter signatures then basically hide that so outside observers can’t really tell what’s happened. Always use adapter signatures — it’s a significant advancement in terms of privacy tech. HTLC swaps. Yes, you can do them, but you’ll leave those hash transactions on the corresponding blockchains and that creates a traceability problem potentially for any analytics firm that wishes to track it.

_**Audience:**_ Makes sense. Thank you.

_**Audience:**_ Hi there. Great product. Looks very nice. You were talking for a bit about compounding of privacy and different use cases. You mentioned one, but I was just wondering which other ones do you have in mind.

_**Dr. Kap:**_ I mean literally any privacy coin… let’s say we integrated BasicSwap DEX into the Particl Marketplace. Every single coin on BasicSwap DEX could be used as a payment option for the Particl Marketplace. So that means every privacy coin that’s integrated into BasicSwap. So that could be Firo with their Alantis protocols, that could be Monero, that could be Pivx, it could be Dash, you know, anything that uses MimbleWimble — any potential privacy technology can be compounded with our base CT and RingCT settlement layers. And it doesn’t have to just work one way —you could go into a purchase using Firo, it gets settled on RingCT with Part. And then you could have maybe a way of coming back out into Monero, you could automate that process. So now you’re combining three different privacy protocols. You’re exponentially increasing your privacy with this technique. And you’re just making yourself untraceable. So yeah, anything goes.

_**Moderator:**_ We have an online question. So are these layer one atomic swaps or is there any wrapping involved?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ No, there’s no wrapping involved. It’s all straight swaps.

_**Moderator:**_ Great there’s one more here. The Particl coin — how is that related? Is it required to do swaps?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ No.

_**Moderator:**_ …or run a BasicSwap node?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ You don’t need to use the Particl coin, to use BasicSwap DEX. it’s just a coin supported by the DEX. If you’re using the Particl Marketplace, the underlying settlements occur in the Particl blockchain, so if you’re buying and selling goods on that marketplace, because it uses a blockchain for the settlement transaction, yes Parts involved there. But for BasicSwap DEX — no. There’s no monetization layers, there’s no fees, there’s no tokens — you just download it, install it, select the coins you want to trade. You just download and sync them and just crack on. And it’s straight swaps. There’s no middleman, there’s no commission, there’s none of that nonsense.

_**Moderator:**_ How would you say BasicSwap compares to something like Haveno?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Like, sorry?

_**Moderator:**_ Haveno. Are you familiar with that?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ I personally not, but I believe my colleagues… I mean to the best I know it’s a fork of Bisque so…

_**Moderator:**_ Yeah.

_**Dr. Kap:**_ I’m going to be honest, I’m not overly familiar with Haveno, so I don’t think I can answer that fairly. But you know maybe one of my colleagues?

_**Moderator:**_ Can you speak to Bisq then?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Yeah I mean, I think we’re a significant advancement in Bisq both in terms of usability, in terms of privacy, in terms of the sheer level of choice that we offer to the end user, in terms of the programmability. Yeah, I think Bisq is a really good solution. But I think you know adapt to signatures in on its own right goes a long way towards improving the privacy that we can provide as one of the sort of key things. But yeah, yeah…

_**Audience:**_ I think Bisq is more for fiat to crypto than DEX. So that’s I think they do something different. My question is — any plans on supporting Bitcoin Lightning, like swap Monero to Lightning and the other way around?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ So yes, that stuff is in the work. We conceptually been looking at the Lightning layer, and we’ve kind of dabbled and experimented with Lightning implementations. I’m gonna be honest, from a scalability perspective our main goal is to take our existing SMSG mixnet, and we’re working on the 2.0 of that protocol to essentially scale it up. That’s in the conceptual stages, and it uses a different approach to Lightning, but I’d ask you just to sort of speak to our devs on that one, because that is a really experimental phase.

_**Audience:**_ When do you anticipate to be out of beta and fully launched?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Oh, the beta BasicSwap DEX is live — you can download it and install it now. Go for it, I think,play around with it, you’re going to be using other adopters setup or installation scripts. So it’s very much building it from the ground up at this stage. So you’ll be downloading the client, composing it, downloading the chain, syncing it. So these are aspects of inconvenience that we’re going to solve. We’re currently working on a web framework, so we can take that core DEX and make it accessible via the website. So yes you can use it right now, but just be aware of the limitations. It’s very much live.

_**Audience:**_ So, the Particl Marketplace has been around for a few years now. What do you think is the biggest point of frictions that prevents it’s from going more mainstream?

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Convenience. I will simply sum it up. This is the thing that stops crypto from going more mainstream is convenience. You heard the phrase “Time is money?” Well, convenience saves time. So if you’re saving time, you’re creating value. Now with the current Particl Marketplace you’re downloading a desktop application onto a desktop computer. So already you’ve created a ton of hidden layers of inconvenience and friction, because someone might want to just use it on their mobile phone, someone may want to access a website. You’re now forcing that user because of the technological limitations of that time to then use that. Now it uses the Part token as its settlement layer, and we don’t yet have the multi-currency support enabled. So that’s your other area of friction. It’s like how do I get hold of Part? Well you’re going to have to go to a centralized exchange or better still use BasicSwap. Now that it’s there. But you have to then acquire the Part tokens, and then you have to get used to that architecture, because it’s a slightly different experience.

I mean in many ways, if you play around with the Particl Marketplace, it really does work like eBay. Actually it’s a lot more advanced than eBay, because you can create an infinite number of marketplaces on it. But big idea and trying to kind of get these big ideas down — that takes time trying to create convenience, takes time you need to let the technology progress through its relevant stages. For us we’ll get the web framework out, we’ll get BasicSwap accessible via web, we’ll get Particl Marketplace accessible via our web, we’ll integrate BasicSwap into the Particl Marketplace, now you’re accessing it on a website, now you’re buying goods and selling them online without any accounts, without any KYC — just have a crypto wallet, send some crypto across, buy your goods — that is convenience by stages. And as we get through those prerequisite stages, we’ll see more and more adoption. This is an inevitability by the way. It doesn’t have to be Particl. It can be any other project. But that is the principle that has to be understood.

_**Moderator:**_ Any other questions? We have a question from online. Is there options to compile without Docker? Docker doesn’t support all platforms.

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Sorry?

_**Moderator:**_ Is there options to compile without Docker? Docker doesn’t support all platforms.

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Yes, so we do have installation scripts to do a very bare bones setup. I mean basically go to the BasicSwap website — there are a couple of installation guides that go through that in detail. Yes.

_**Moderator:**_ Thank you very much.

_**Dr. Kap:**_ Thank you.
