# Dan Behrman

_**Taxation Is Theft**_

[https://youtu.be/NSDMsSURWZo](https://youtu.be/NSDMsSURWZo)

---

_**Doug:**_ Next up we have a lightning talk, quick talk, only 10 minutes long, not a talk on Lightning. Dan ‘Taxation Is Theft. Behrman. Come on out, man. You can guess what he’s going to be talking about. Let’s see how he relates it to Monero. This is going to be interesting. Thanks for coming, man.

_**Dan:**_ Awesome. All right, I’m going to try to squeeze this into 10 minutes.

_**Doug:**_ You can do one or two questions after this.

_**Dan:**_ Ok, cool. I’m going to start out with a disclaimer. Anything I say today — go fact check me, go double check it. Don’t believe me. Trust the laws, the courts. Go check this stuff out for yourself. Don’t go out and attack the IRS tomorrow. I tried that once when I first started learning this stuff and it didn’t work out too well. There’s really a lot of information, a lot of little things that can happen and go wrong. But this is kind of the information that I’ve found, I’ve landed at.

So of course I changed my middle name to ‘Taxation is Theft’, lawfully, not legally, because it’s my name, not the government’s. I don’t have to ask them for permission to change my name. But I changed it to ‘Taxation is Theft’ because it is. And I know a lot of people that hate taxes, they hate that message, ‘Taxation is Theft’, because they think we still need taxes to pay for some things. Well, it’s theft. Because plain and simple, if you don’t pay it, they’re going to take it. If you try to prevent them from taking it, they’re going to arrest you. If you resist, they’ll kill you. This is theft, plain and simple. It’s no different than robbing a bank.

Now a lot of people think the IRS follow special rules that they can get around your Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights and everything else. That’s actually not true. They operate on a snitch system. So basically all the information that they have was snitched to them from somewhere else.

The reality is most people don’t have to pay tax in the United States, not even American citizens. But what happens is when you give money to somebody else, your boss gives money to you, your boss goes to the IRS and says: “I gave that person taxable money”. And the IRS says: “Well, I have a thing here that says it was taxable money”. It’s kind of like if you have a car and it’s a BMW and the government says: “It’s Ford”. It’s obviously a BMW, but the government’s like: “Well, somebody signed a paper here that says it’s a Ford”. They’re gonna go by that paper if for whatever reason it’s to their benefit, unless you challenge it the right way. And there are ways to do that.

But as far as snitching, funny story, UBS, I think it was about 10 or 15 years ago, big Swiss bank where a lot of, I Don’t wanna say money laundering, but tax shelters and tax privacy cases, numbered bank accounts, that sort of thing was going on. The IRS came out and said: “Hey, we’re gonna give money to anybody who can give us credible information and testify against people who have been storing money offshore”. So UBS came out and said: “Hey, we’ll give you our entire set of data. We’ll let you know everybody who’s been storing their money here, and you’re going to pay us billions of dollars”. So they did that. They gave the information to UBS, and snitches get stitches. So the IRS said: “Well, you were helping them, so we’re going to file criminal charges against you and we’re not going to pay you for that information”. That’s how terrible those guys are.

So a lot of people are concerned about this new thing that any transaction over $600 is going to get reported to the IRS. The reality is that has to go on 1099, which basically says that you’re receiving privilege income from the government. I’m not gonna get into all the details of that because it takes a lot longer than 10 minutes. But the point is this information can be disputed. But a lot of people think that this is a privacy issue, right, your privacy is being violated because they’re able to look into your bank accounts. But it’s not. It’s not your bank account. You have a joint account with a bank, and the bank wants to follow the laws with the government, because the banks and the governments back each other up. The banks keep the government from failing, the government keeps the banks from failing. That’s how the entire system is operated. So of course, they’re gonna share all their information with the government in most cases.

Now, when it comes to blockchain. If the IRS wants to take money from you, right, if they go to a bank and let’s say you have a bank account that does not have your social security number on it — because either you created this bank account before 9-11, or there are some banks that will open accounts without social security numbers, it’s actually not required by law — if you have one of those accounts, the IRS cannot touch it, because according to them, it’s not owned by the same taxpayer. that tax ID or that social security number is the account that governs everything that the IRS has, and they cannot take it if it’s not connected to your social security number. So where on the blockchain is your social security number?

And we have a snitch system, right? And this is why the government hates crypto. We do have a snitch system where if you’re moving money in and out of a crypto exchange, they’re pushing the crypto exchanges to snitch everything. They’re asking for KYC, social security numbers, and everything else. Why? So they can send 1099s to the government and testify that you received taxable income, which is a lie in most cases. Because the government’s not paying anybody in crypto, not that I know of. But so where on the blockchain is your social security number? Who on the blockchain is gonna snitch to the IRS and say: “This guy got taxable money in his account in his wallet”. Now they can trace some of this stuff, but who’s to say that wallet actually belongs to you? And think about this in a very abstract form, right. Let’s say a guy named Dave, and he has a corporation. If I gave $100 to Dave, is that for his corporation or is that for him? Whose income is that? Well, that depends on his ledgers and his books, or it depends on me snitching to the IRS and saying: “No, I gave it to his corporation”. But it’s based on the snitch system. And one of us has to say that money was a Ford, not a Honda, or not a BMW. This is how their entire system operates.

Another thing that’s interesting is the IRS don’t ever trust the government. I mean, I think most people here will agree with that. But don’t ever trust the government when it comes to the law, because the government and their agencies will tell you things that are not the law. Perfect example. I ran for president in 2020 for US president, I ran in 2024, I filed the paperwork for it, but they didn’t like the way I did it. So I submitted it and through this web form, they, you know, it’s the internet, right? I can’t just leave a form blank. They forced me to enter a number. They wanted a bank account number for my election committee. I left, or they wouldn’t let me leave it blank, so I entered all zeros. I submitted it, they called me up and they’re like: “Hey, we can’t take that. You have to give us a bank account number”. And I said: “I have to give you a bank account number?” And I’m talking to the head accountant at the FEC. They’re like: “Yeah, you have to give us a bank account number”. And I said: “Is there a law which requires me to give you a bank account number?” And they said: “Well, I’m not sure”. Because they don’t want to lie or misrepresent the actual law. I’m not sure if there’s a law, but you have to give it to us. That’s a bit strange.

The IRS goes a bit further. If you read the Internal Revenue Manual, which is the employee manual, which is on their website. It says to their employees: “Anything posted on the IRS website is not the law”. Think about that. They’re telling us information about who has to file, how we have to file, what we have to do, whether or not we have to report our cryptocurrency. They’re telling us this through their website, and they’re telling their employees: “That’s not the law”. Think about that. Because they started doing this thing, we’re on your 1040, they’re asking you: “Do you own any crypto, did you make any trades?” And if you start to go to your favorite search engine and look for this, what you’re gonna see is you’re gonna see a lot of results come up from tax preparation services with blog posts on this saying: “The IRS has made it clear, everybody has to answer that question”. I’ve been digging through the tax code for a couple years now, and I haven’t seen a single mention of cryptocurrencies or there’s another word they use for “electronic digital something”. There’s no mention of it. There’s no obligation when you file your return to answer that question, but it’s on the IRS website and then all the tax prep agencies are telling you: “Well, you have to comply with that”. I Don’t think you do.

And a lot of people have this question: “Well, when I’m filling out this 1040, am I violating my own constitutional rights?” Don’t you have a right not to testify against yourself? And when you submit this form, aren’t you signing at the bottom where it says: “I declare under penalty of perjury that everything on this form is correct?” And can’t that be used against you in court, any criminal or civil case? Absolutely. So at what point do your rights apply? Well, the reality is, as I said before, none of this. applies to most of your income. And this is the big secret that the IRS doesn’t want you to know.

But I guess I wanna wrap this up with just this idea that when I was born in Los Angeles, and I grew up in Los Angeles, for 25 years I lived there, I was kind of, especially in my younger years, I was conditioned, and I think we all were, to believe that this is the system that we live in, right? Death and taxes, right? Government. Government is everything. You have a problem, go to the police. The government will solve all of your problems. You live in this system. You are a cog in this system. You are a small piece of the government, but that’s actually not the truth. Especially when they give us this rhetoric, a government of the people, by the people, for the people. We are the sovereigns, we are the kings. They have castle doctrine where we’re supposed to be the sole owner of our property and the government cannot enter our homes. This is the idea that we have, and yet we’re conditioned to believe that the government controls everything we do from ourselves, within our own homes, within our own communities and everywhere else. So we need to stop thinking that we live within a government system, and we can start thinking that we live without a government system. And in that way, we can actually start to understand what real freedom is about. And this is a transition that took me tens of years, decades to go through to really understand this. But once you go from that, you look back on yourself and you’re like: “Holy shit! I was a brainwashed sheep”. It really is like that. It’s not about like: “Yeah, the government should be smaller and they should give us more privacy”. It’s like: “Wow! I was absolutely brainwashed”.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._


_**Dan:**_ So thank you. If anybody has any questions. Anybody?

I also want to throw this out for the whole idea that most Americans don’t have to pay the income tax. And this is kind of a big red flag. Section 1 of Title 26 says there is hereby imposed the tax on the income, on the taxable income of every individual at this rate, and they have a chart of rates. If you read that, it would imply that Vladimir Putin is supposed to be paying this income tax. It doesn’t make any sense, right? And that’s because the way the laws are written are intentionally ambiguous to make us believe that: “Hey, that applies to me, I’m an individual. I guess That’s the rate I gotta pay”. It says “all individuals”, but it doesn’t. There’s a very limited scope and it’s not just the United States. As some people say: “Oh, well, that’s obvious. He’s not in the United States”. There are people outside of the United States who have to pay the income tax, and it’s because they’re receiving money from the government or through some privileged government channel.

Anyways, there’s a lot of information about this. It really is a difficult subject, but there’s a lot of information on taxationistheft.info. That’s my website. There’s a free download with a lot of information. I’m working on a book right now, so if you subscribe to the mailing list, you’ll get updates on that. But like I said, it’s not something you’re going to want to go out and fight the IRS tomorrow. Please don’t. Especially until you really understand how the system works. But when you’re ready to, I’ve been collecting resources and people who have been doing this for decades. There are over a quarter of a million people who have been filing and getting a 100% returns on everything that’s been withheld. There’s over a 100 million people who don’t file at all and never get a call from the IRS. This is the reality of the system. And it’s possible and it’s not as stressful and scary as we believe it to be. But it’s definitely worth it to just take the first step and start getting some of the information.

Yeah, you had a question?

_**Audience:**_ [...]

_**Dan:**_ 87,000 new IRS agents. So these are actually special agents, and they divide their agents into two categories. The accountants and the special agents, who are the guys who get guns and get to go around and do tax crimes. And the IRS actually handles a lot of the other taxes — alcohol taxes, gun taxes, import, export, like stamps, like all this stuff. And that’s what those agents are for. What are they actually gonna use them for? I have no idea. It might just be a huge waste of government resources. But the bottom line is if you’re not being charged with a crime — and it takes a lot to get past, to cross that threshold into being charged with a crime, like you have to actually lie to the IRS, like say, you know, I lost $50,000 in a boating accident, or I have 100,000 kids — like, if you’re doing something like that, you’re gonna get criminal charges. But short of that, it’s really difficult.

Did you have another question?

_**Audience:**_ [...]

_**Dan:**_ They hired some of them, they started training them, they took a bunch of PR photos, but I Don’t know what the status of that is or who knows.

Yeah.

_**Audience:**_ What was the catalyst that opened your eyes to, you know, like what you were saying? Because I mean, I felt the same way for a long time, like I’ve done a lot of this to be shit. What was the catalyst that made you put you on the path that you’re on right now?

_**Dan:**_ There’s been a lot of things along the way, like, you know. When I grew up, it was always like: “Oh, trust the police. They’re there to keep the community safe” and everything else. And then I was still pretty young, but my mom would be driving me around: “Put your seat belt on. There’s a cop over there”. Wait a minute. I thought they were the good guys. Why are you telling me to be afraid of them? So that was a small thing. But then it gets to the bigger things. When I started driving, I was a speed freak. I got a lot of traffic tickets. And I went and I fought the traffic system. And I realized that whole system is smoke and mirrors. I haven’t had a driver’s license, registered a car, or paid a traffic ticket in 15 years. And they stop me and they ask a million questions, but at the end of the day, they’re like: “You gotta go. Sorry, man. I’ll write you a ticket”. Sometimes I show up to just mess with the courts and I show up and the ticket’s already been voided. The whole system is smoke and mirrors.

And then of course, getting in a fight with the IRS and seeing how they actually operate. So at one point, like I said, I did try to fight them one time. And eventually, I was sending letters saying: “I’m not going to pay this. I’m not legally obligated”. Eventually, they sent me a letter back. I didn’t know how to respond. I didn’t have anyone I could turn to for answers. So they basically sent a letter to my bank, which, and I didn’t know how to fight this either, but they sent a letter to my bank saying: “Apparently you have an account and you have some money that belongs to this guy. Could you please send that to us?” And on the back of the form it says: “It’s not a seizure unless it’s signed by a judge”. This was signed by a scribble that didn’t even have a printed name next to it. And this is routine. The IRS does this all the time. They send it to the bank and they say: “Could you just please give it to us?” And they hand it over, because the banks and the government are in cahoots.

And another interesting thing about this is they can do the same thing with property, right? They can show up to your house and say: “I got a thing from the IRS”. They’ll come with the sheriff to make it look scary, right? Guys with guns. And they’ll say: “Can we come in your house and take some of this property so that we can use it against your tax bill?” You can tell them no. If they don’t have a court order, they can go back and get a court order, but you have a right to show up in court and challenge that. But if you just say: “Yeah, sure, come on in, I guess. I guess I owe you the money, come on in, take whatever you want. This sucks, man, but okay, do what you gotta do”. You just gave him permission. You just admitted like: “I guess your accounting’s right, come take my stuff”, and that’s the end of it. So all of this stuff kinda builds up over time, and it’s like, I learn more and more every day, and I’m like: “Man, this whole system is a corrupt mess”. And that’s all it is, they’re just trying to imprison and enslave all of us.

_**Doug:**_ All right, let’s take actually another question, because I want to make sure these slides are up. Guys, are Luke’s slides ready to go? Yes, no? All right, we’ll take another question. One more question, guys. Nothing? Well, what was the, I think there was a question from somebody at the at-home audience over here. Question: “Is it required to become a state national or the like to claim tax independence?”

_**Dan:**_ No, Don’t follow that stuff. That’ll get you in prison. So there’s this belief that the tax only applies to US citizens as if the tax is on the person themselves. It doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter if you’re a citizen or not. It doesn’t matter if you’re a foreign national, a non-resident alien, which is a thing. It doesn’t matter what your citizenship status is. The tax is not on the person. It’s not on your job. It’s on income. It’s on trade or business, which I’m not gonna get into the whole details of that, but basically means privileged income that you’re receiving from the government. That’s all they have the right to tax even though they say like: “Oh the 16th Amendment says, you know, we can tax income”. It’s still extremely limited. The Supreme Court has ruled on it. It is an excise tax. And the only excise, and an excise is a privilege. It’s a privilege you receive from the government. That’s what an excise tax is. And so they can only tax privileged income from the government. So they have different classes of this. But that’s basically what it is. It has nothing to do with whether or not you’re a citizen.

And let me just add this one thing to that, because that is one big thing of misinformation. There’s a lot of misinformation out there. If you try to research this stuff, I mean, I’ve spent the past 20 years trying to separate what’s true from what’s false, because there’s a lot of stuff that even sounds practical, but it’s just completely wrong. The courts won’t uphold it. There’s no legal foundation for it. So be careful when you go out and research this stuff. Always verify the sources, check the Supreme Court rulings. Don’t always rely on even the federal appeals courts because they do some pretty nefarious stuff in their rulings. But you can usually pick those out by the way that they talk about the taxpayer. In a court opinion, they’ll say: “This guy’s an idiot”, instead of some rational ruling of why he’s wrong, just: “This guy’s an idiot. Guilty”. That doesn’t make any sense. That’s not how a court’s supposed to operate. So some of that stuff should be red flags, but you just really have to double check and verify everything. And also there’s a forum on taxationistheft.info where if you find some of these questions about all these things, you can bring them up and we’ll fact check and cross check and everything else.

_**Doug:**_ Any other questions? Go ahead.

_**Audience:**_ Like I can verify kind of what you said earlier about, like you get a ticket and then it disappears. I went, got pulled over for running a stop sign. I didn’t admit to it. He didn’t charge me with running a stop sign, but I had a tail light. So he gave me a fix it ticket. I showed up in court. They couldn’t find anything. It was just already, I didn’t have a driver’s license. I didn’t just, I had one on record, but not on my person. That might have had something to do with it.

_**Dan:**_ Yeah, it’s, I mean, they lose paperwork all the time. It’s a big fat bureaucracy, so yeah, it’s a mess. Was there another question back here? Awesome. All right. Well, thank you guys for listening.
