# Francisco "ArticMine" Cabañas

_**A Model for the Fundamental Value of Monero**_

[https://youtu.be/w1tsSc3O-qo](https://youtu.be/w1tsSc3O-qo)

---

_**Doug:**_ Ok, guys, we are back. We’ve got ArticMine coming up. He’s going to be giving a talk “A Model for the Fundamental Value of Monero”. So this should be a very interesting one for those that are interested in why Monero may have any value to begin with. Artic’s gonna break it down in the most fundamental form. Take it away.

_**Francisco:**_ Thank you for the great introduction. For those who don’t know, I normally go as ‘ArticMine’ on the webs. My name is Francisco Cabañas. I live in Vancouver. I’m one of the members of the Core Team involved with Monero since 2014, and was involved with the Core Team since 2016. So what we’re going to talk about is fundamental value. Is there a fundamental value through cryptocurrency and in particular Monero.

Now the nature of this particular topic, because we’re talking of a potential investment, returns, etc — this is critical. This is the only part that’s going to be bilingual. Disclaimer. Descargo de responsabilidad. This is not financial advice. Esto no es un consejo financiero. The information in this presentation is not intended as financial advice. Past performance is not indicative of future return, nor is it indicative of future risk. La información en esta presentación no pretende ser un consejo financier. El redimiento pasado no es indicative de redemiento future, ni es indicativo de riesgo futuro.

So the first approach you can look at is the Austrian economics perspective. And one of the most interesting books in Austrian economics and one of the simplest is Carl Menger’s “On the Origins of Money”. What I really like about this, it is relatively short, about 50 pages long. For those who might not know who Carl Menger is, Carl Menger founded the Austrian School of Economics. He’s basically the mentor of people like Mises and Hayek. This work was first published in 1892. It’s available for download from The Business Institute, and it’s a really concise and to the point of introduction of the fundamentals of Austrian economics.

So saleableness — is a bit of an interesting word, it’s a bit of a cake — the German is ‘Absatzfähigkeit’, just the power to sale the commodities. So what are we talking about here? What we’re talking about if we take a series of commodities in a marketplace? Which is the commodity that I most likely be able to use? Money is the commodity that has the highest characteristics — marketability, saleability, sales capacity, sales ability, very high liquidity and very low friction costs of free costs. So, for example, if I take a purchase this commodity and they want to sell it back, I have the lowest loss, the lowest spread in trading that commodity. So that commodity is the one that has a stronger saleableness. The concept is basically — I’m going to return it. How much of my money I’m going to get back? How much my value am I going to get back? So, very high liquidity and very low friction.

So “The reason why precious metals has become the general current medium of exchange — this is a quote from Menger —among here and there a nation prior to its appearance in history, and in the sequel among all peoples of advanced economic civilization, is because their saleableness”. So this is the argument why gold is so commonly used of money. The perspective you’re talking in the 1890s. “And at the same time because they’re found to be specially qualified for the concomitant and subsidiary functions of money”. Carl Menger, “Origins of Money”, page 45.

So the implication here is that you need a commodity that has to generally consider the seven characteristics of money: durability — so it doesn’t just decay when it’s sitting there —portability, divisibility, uniformity and fungibility, which is one of the topics is really talked about in Monero, limited supply and acceptability. And these are historically well-known precious metals, particularly gold.

So the Austrian economics then also has this relatively subsidiary approach to the role of the state. The state’s measures “have not first made money of the precious metals, but have only perfected them in the function of money”. And a great example of this — it’s a state takes a piece of gold, mint it into a coin, and then takes that coin and says: “Well, this is how much fineness it has, this is what weight is”, and so everybody recognizes that coin so they know how much gold they’re getting. And there’s a little premium to that which could be considered senior rich. A great example with silver in the Roman Empire, started with the Denarius originally about 95 percent silver, then they get into the basement, and this isn’t that can happen — the state decides: “Well, we can get away with putting less and less silver in this thing”. In about three centuries later the successors had like one percent silver in it. But the basic concept is the state can actually enhance it, but it’s not the main driver. They kind of improve it a bit. And an example is telling people what you’re getting in terms of how much gold and how fine it is.

So the next point that we look at is what’s called the “equation of exchange”. This might sound very strong jump or go all of a sudden from an Austrian topic to what’s generally accepted to be a Kinesian topic, but the equation of exchange and its most basic form is MV = PQ, M is the total money supply, V is the velocity of money, and when we’re talking about money supply, we’re talking M0, so in the case of Monero will be the actual Monero on the blockchain, not fractional reserve banking, in the case of fiat again you’re talking and say for example the United States we’re talking about bank reserves and Federal Reserve, and gaussian circulation. So you’re not talking M1 or M2 etc. There is no banking and fractional reserve, banking involvement. And then price is the price level of goods and services in the economy. And Q is an index of all the real expenditures, the newly produced goods and services. It’s actually an identity. We’re simply saying, you know, you take how much money from one side of the leger, how much money the other side of the leger. So that’s what we’re saying.

This is a simplified version of the broader base where you basically take MV equals pi, qi. You look through every single price of every single customer service, and you look at every single price, so you’re looking at cups of coffees, and houses, and other cryptocurrencies, and haircuts etc. And this is very much commonly used in Keynesian arguments, also by the monetarists. In this talk I’m going to apply it to another application, which is not as commonly understood, which is currencies that are harder than gold, so more than Austrian currencies. But it’s important to say that it lies to the foundation of Austrian economics mostly used for fiat currencies where the money supply is controlled by central state authority or central bank.

And of course the more controversial issue is what they’re saying is we’re going to increase the money supply M, they’re trying to increase Q, and what they really get is an increase in P. All right, versa they’re trying to reduce P and what they get is a reduction in Q. So they really only control the product of two, and this is where the whole argument between monetarists and kinesians come in, and why your banking, you always see a Federal Reserve is trying to reduce inflation, but at the same time not cause a crash in the market. That’s the dilemma, the banking dilemma. However the key thing here is there’s no reason why it could not be applied to an economy where gold is used as money, and this is the Austrian example, or even a fiat currency, where the money supply is fixed or falls with time.

So we look at it from the point of the using gold as money, and it’s really quite boring, because what actually happens is that M tracks Q. And this might surprise people, but historical gold has been known as a store of value. One very common and favorite example is the attire for a senator — you look at the cost of the entire member of the Roman Senate, two millennia ago, and it was approximately, an emphasis approximately, one ounce of gold. Then two millennia later you look at the cost of attire for a member of the United States Senate, and it’s also approximately one ounce of gold. That’s quite remarkable.

So what we’re saying is it keeps its value M tracks Q, roughly, not exactly, I mean someone’s gonna say I found a suit of clothes for 500 dollars and that guy said four thousand so gold is too high or too low, but on an average long-term basis it tracks it, and also with a cycle I will say typically in terms of decades. So you’re obviously going to see significant variations in the short term, but over this long term, particularly decades to millennia, gold has tracked economic activity. And the main argument for this is that you really think of gold, which you think of it not as a scarce resource, but as a very plentiful or even infinite resource. I mean we could argue the universe is infinite and this infinite amount of gold therefore, but which is very, very expensive and difficult to extract and concentrate. And so what happens is as economic activity improve, goes up, it is economically attractive to mine more gold to prospect for, to extract it etc. And then that kind of brings the price of gold back down to that economic level. Similarly, if the price, if the economy goes down, and typically what happens is the mining stops, and again there’s a delay, this is why you get the cycle, and eventually the thing meets back to an equilibrium. So this is why we see this long-term case. But one of the key point is when you’re looking at gold is money, the equation of exchange is just boring, it’s not interesting, because essentially all you’re saying is that money supply is tracking economic growth, the economy, it’s actually the economy, so is tracking Q.

So now we’ll return to the question of saleableness, and we’ll fast forward to the early 21st century. And when I ask you a question: Bitcoin and Monero, and what exactly is a motivation here? So the motivation is digital commodity money, and by that I’m taking that with better saleableness than existing centralized ledger forms of digital money. This is kind of what Satoshi set out to do. So let’s create a new commodity, a digital commodity that has better saleableness than the existing credit cards and debit cards, and bank transfers etc. And in principle if there is a significant portion of the economy where this is the case, then this thing has a very useful economic value.

So for example the centralized ledgers of digital money are very poor particularly in some specific cases economically marginalized, poor people are involved — a great example is paying a person who is experiencing homelessness whilst, and I emphasis, whilst that person is experiencing  homelessness are you going to use Apple Pay? No. Are you going to use a debit card? No. Credit card? No. Cash would work. In 2012 Bitcoin would work. And today Monero works. So that is an example where you’re particularly paying marginalizing, poor people in a general sense. The other one is right there they pay us. It’s a similar situation. So you’re dealing with those type of transactions. That’s the first group.

The second group is very significant is international transactions, even involving privileged and wealthy individuals, that are cross-border. And a classic example of this is I go to a hotel in Toronto, I book a room, I’m successfully financial, I pay with my credit card. Probably a hotel is going to pay about 1 percent, 1.5 percent in merchant fees on this credit card transaction, it’s domestic etc, I get one percent cash back. The cost of that transaction is point five percent. I would argue that for example Monero have a tough time competing with that. Now you do the same thing in a hotel in Mexico City, and you have two more factors. The first one is that the card is now foreign rather than domestic, so there’s a big surcharge, and so they’re going to be charged a lot more money. And at the same time I get a hidden surcharge, and believe me the credit card companies go out the way to hide this, in the Canadian dollar to Mexican peso spread. So I’m not getting them in market rate I’m getting probably paid about five percent. For example I was told, I had a taxi to go to the hotel, and then if I were to pay with a credit card, it was a five percent surcharge. So now what could be half a point, can become closer to even ten, five ten percent, so you’re looking at easily 10 times the amount just because we crossed an international boundary. So within Canada 0.5, Mexico probably six or seven percent. I still get my one percent cash back if I use my Canadian credit card, but there’s this huge difference in saleableness. So we go back and look at the question. Can we create a commodity that does better?

And now we really go for the jackpot here, and we combine the two. And what we end up with remittances? So you have poor people taking low and marginal jobs, there are immigrants or temporary workers in a wealthy country, could be North America, Europe, Middle East, saving the salaries and entering around and selling a portion of that to support a family back in some less developed countries — El Salvador have been a perfect example. Easily 20 percent or more be gone and fees in these transfers. There is a reason why El Salvador looked at Bitcoin — they were concerned about remittances. 25 percent of the GDP of El Salvador is remittances. Very close to that. So they look at alternatives, the Bitcoin is one of them. That’s another story. So transactions now you have a real motivation to create a commodity, where you could take in the Austrian principle of saleableness and say: “I’m going to do better than these credit card companies”. And that was the motivation for Bitcoin, and of course for motivation in 2014 for Monero.

Now keep in mind, when you start talking about a lot of the features of Monero — privacy, fungibility, etc — these kind of frictions with saleableness. So if you have a very private fungible currency then that’s going to be a lot more saleableness to tell them: “That’s the one where you pay for something and then get charged with a crime you have nothing to do with”, which can happen, for example, in Bitcoin. So obviously the Monero payment is a lot more saleable than the Bitcoin payment, where I run the risk of a bogus or a criminal charge. That’s an extreme case, but that’s an example of what I’m talking about. So the real issue then is Bitcoin initially like had a saleableness, so I’m talking about  2011, 2012, 2013, and has lost especially for small transactions, mainly because the fees were very high.

So you have a situation where the fees was so high, because you’re restricted to the block size, so people couldn’t really transact for small transactions. And of course the rise of blockchain surveillance, which is what I mentioned before. And the serious questions regarding the security of Bitcoin as block rewards fall — this is a controversial topic, which is a bit outside of this discussion, but there’s a ticking time bomb as the block reward. So there’s no guarantee at all the transaction fees are going to replace block reward and any of the variants of Bitcoin, I don’t care we’re talking about Bitcoin Core, or BTC, or Bitcoin Cash, or Bitcoin SV, or Bitcoin Gold — they all have the same fundamental problem: there’s no evidence that this is going to work, that the transactions fees will replace it. We know that a block reward comparable to that Monero works, because Monero has been doing that for already for a year. But we have no idea what’s going to happen down the road. So that’s a Bitcoin.

So Monero at this point is very good saleableness experience, especially for small transactions, very low fees, adaptive block size, strong fungibility and privacy, constant block rewards ensuring long-term security. It’s slightly lower saleableness than Bitcoin for very large transactions, because we’re a much smaller chain — our market cap is about a 200th of that of Bitcoin. So you obviously, if you’re gonna buy multi-million dollar pieces of property, for example, Bitcoin would be a better choice than Monero. And you really don’t care about the 50 dollar fee that you’re going to pay on the block size, if you’re spending five million dollars in real estate. So that’s kind of where Bitcoin is kind of still strong vs Monero, but that could change in the future of course. So small capitalization.

So now we’re going to look at deriving a fundamental value for Monero. So what do we know? Well, we know that Monero has this tail emission or minimum emission 0.6 XMR from a block, and we know also, and this interesting theory in our reference a Peter Todd article in 2020, and which was originally put together by smooth, which is one of the Monero Core team member back in about 2015, I believe 2016. And that is in Monero what you’re really gonna get is not a constant inflation of 0.6 XMR on a block, but an equilibrium between these block reward or minimum emission and lost coins. So people are going to lose coins in boarding accidents, quote, not as much as some people pretend that it is happening, but you could have got a few losses, and that’s going to be an equilibrium with a block reward. And so essentially we’ll reach that equilibrium and the money supply will reach somewhat about where we are right now, maybe a bit more, a bit less — we don’t know exactly what that’s going to be, because the whole thing is private, that’s really interesting, but the one thing we can say is it’s going to be harder than gold. So we should really look at the inflation rate of the tail emission as the worst possible point of inflation it’s likely going to be harder than this 0.6 XMR because of lost coins. And we’re going to end up in some kind of stability between the two. If you want to read more on the subject I recommend Peter Todd’s article where he actually covers this issue and the mathematics behind it, why we research such conclusion.

Ok, so what we have is optimal — we have this minimum block reward, just below gold, but it’s still harder than Austrian money. And that’s our point in the moment harder than Austrian money is important to ensure that we can jump, start the currency basically. So it’s Monero is close to optimal to ensure a security while exceeding the gold hard money standard of Austrian economics mainly gold itself.

So the equation of exchange with constant M predicts a drop in P deflation with the gold in Q. So what happens now is on average your velocity is going to be constant, but now you increase the market size of the Monero economy, you have to have deflation, because you have a constant supply. So the Monero economy by its very nature is going to be deflationary. There are going to be many people that are motivated to use Monero simply because of the saleableness. We’ve got to go back to that. Because they’re saving money on that remittance. If I can send the remittance using Monero for say 10 cents rather than 20 dollars, that is a reason for me to buy Monero for that purpose. The fact that I may lose the further opportunity on the 200, I might be tempted to take the 20 dollars that I’m saving in Western Union and just keep that portion of the Monero and save it for the kids education, while the family gets the same amount they would have got from Western Union. So there’s an opportunity for saving there, but still the incentive to use a deflationary currency simply because you have lower fees and lower friction that you would have with a more mainstream inflationary currencies. So what happens then is there’s a reason for that.

So now put yourself in the perspective of the investor or the speculator. The investor speculator looks at this and say: “Hmm, I see a financial opportunity here. If I study enough the cryptocurrency — and this is where the disclaimer comes in, because it’s really important that this is not financial advice — I can put money up, buy Monero, hold it with the expectation that as Q increases, I’m gonna see a return because of the following P”. So all you’re assuming is the equation of exchange, but now we turn around and you create an attractive investment opportunity. Investment speculation in Monero creates a market capitalization and query. What does that do?

What that does is it creates, it jump starts the economy, because now someone is saying the Monero has value, which in the case of gold is a pre-existing value of the commodity, and increases of fiat currencies is the state theory of money, which is in generally the state says: “It is a value”. So for example you can pay taxes with it or you can settle disputes with it in our courts. And this leads to this fundamental value of M.

So now you have the money supply has to have a value simply because of the better saleableness of Monero vs credit cards for example in Western Union and so on. And this is manifested by the attractiveness of speculation and investment. Now that speculation and investment also facilitates the market, because it provides liquidity. So you get a feedback of a positive feedback loop developing. So there is a fundamental value from this. And this also is a feedback loop that jump starts the currency. So it’s essentially the speculation investment theory of money where you jump start the currencies with speculation and investment.

But the fundamental values derive from the fact that person sending 200 dollars to El Salvador is going to pay 10 cents or 2 cents, 1 cent or whatever rather than say 20 dollars. That has an economic value in the economy which leads to a commodity value for Monero. And that’s a key point to understand — if you beat the existing economies, the saleableness is going to make it. It’s the same argument that is made by the Austrians for gold. It becomes a more natural attractive commodity even though it’s been engineered, it’s essential to do this, that’s what drives that fundamental value.

Now the more interesting question at this point is can we relate Q for cryptocurrency to the block size? Now this is my favorite topic. So the particular transaction rate. Obviously if you have a given distribution of goods and services in your economy, and you simply increase it, and that economy — we need a key assumption is that yes economic activity Q is primarily on chain — the answer is yes, now by on chain is for example it could be a situation where somebody goes to a KYC exchange, deposit US dollars, buys Monero, the US Dollars has settled on the banking system, the Monero is withdrawn as per the recommendations to the community, otherwise known as Monero Run, that Monero  settled on chain. So from the perspective of the Monero blockchain that is a decentralized transaction on chain. The fact that the counterparty transaction will settled in the US banking system or the Canadian Bank assistant, or the European banking system does not change the fact that the Monero side of the transaction was decentralized. So you have one decentralized, one centralized. The case where it’s not on chain would be it’s left in the exchange and then traded. Then you have a banking system or MSC system of volume of Monero. So that’s not going to show up on the Monero blockchain, what will show on the Monero blockchain is when it withdrawn.

So yes if there’s no change in the distribution of Q, TX will be proportional to Q leading to a linear relationship between Q and TX. So what you would expect is a linear relationship in this scenario between the transaction rate and the size of the economy. There is a twist. As you increase the size of the economy and you lower P you do what? You use the market cap. So now suddenly except for just cups of coffee maybe we can buy houses. That’s going to mean you’re going to have a higher growth, higher Q than the rate of QX. So for example it’s an increase in microcapitalization then TX for example grow at a lower rate than Q. So there’s a faster growth in the economy than the block size.

Should we expected on average P will fall at least linearly or possibly fast with an increase in transactions? So what we have here is a relationship between the block size and the market capitalization. Rough relationship, and I emphasize — rough, which is basic saying that as you increase the block size you’re going to see the market capitalization… sorry, as you increase the transaction activity and block size your market capitalization is going to go from somewhere from linear to quadratically higher. So the question then becomes a Monero adoption increases by a thousand times, does the price increase by a thousand times or a million times or do something else.

Now, I gave a talk in a virtual conference back in 2022, The Grayhat Conference, and I’m gonna give a rough estimate on this by looking at trends. And essentially what you do, what we did is you take the price of, in USD adjusted for inflation, dollars of daily transaction rate for Monero, Bitcoin, Litecoin, Dogecoin, Dash, and we look at how much the price of market capitalization has changed, together with how much the block size has changed. So we look at this ratio of the TXs, and we look at the transactions per day, and we look at the proportion of the block size, and we look at the market capitalizations. And so in the first example, we looked at, for BTC, the 90-day average ending on October 27, 2010, is also included. So we looked at the 90-day average price. Basically, on two dates and then in two dates and just took a linear interpolation. There are other ways to do this, but you just get a rough idea of, this is a reasonable assumption. So what does it tell us? Y equals one indicates a linear relationship, this is a log scale analysis. Well, Y equals 2, price moves at the square of adoption. So essentially what we’re saying is it’s somewhere between 1 and 2, roughly. A value indicates a relationship between linear and quadratic. This will become significant when trying to understand models of valuation and network and monetary theory.

So. It was chosen at the time to avoid clear market tops and bottoms, provide a five-year period, and I filed 15 months after the genesis block. The end date is arbitrary and it’s related to the conference. So it was an arbitrary date for the end that was really set just because I happened to have a conference date that day. So it was pretty arbitrary set but not created directly. The coins were chosen to have an existence at least as long as one era and were designed to be used as money originally, have a current transaction rate as comparable or greater than one era and use proof-of-work as their consensus system. Now I avoided ledger forks such as Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin SV because a lot of complexities they are introduced by those markets that I didn’t want to get involved with. And this is my data source there called metrics.io.

So then we look at the historical indicators. So if we take the range from October 15 to October 27, we find that the growth of Monero was about 1.59. The exponent is 1.59. So between linear and quadratic. That’s what we found for Monero. And Litecoin is slightly lower, just below 0.9. And Dash, it was 1.06.

Okay, so what can I argue in those cases, there hasn’t been much change in what it was used for. That’s all that’s saying. But in that period of time, Dash is a good indicator, actually. It’s gone, fallen hard times more lately, but at that point in time, it had decent growth. Dogecoin is 2.3. That’s interesting in the sense that maybe people were just buying it for fun rather than to engage in transactions. Possibly, because the main element of it.

The interesting one is Bitcoin. From 2015 to 2020 — 4.20. What is going on here? This is starting to not make a lot of sense. And then we look at Bitcoin from 2010 to 2015, comes in a 1.28, right where we weren’t expected. So in the early days of Bitcoin, it’s behaving the same model where the block size is tracking the transaction rate block size. You see a market cap, which is between one and two with the gross transaction rate of the block size. That’s what you would expect. And then all of a sudden, in the following period, it doesn’t. Okay, this is the average 1.64, which is not that meaningful for Bitcoin, in my opinion. And less is the tale. So you have the summaries, 2015, 2020, and you see 1.59, 0.89, 1.06, 2.0. Then if you look at Bitcoin, 2010, 2015, 1.28, That’s pretty consistent, roughly. And your outlier is Bitcoin 2015 to 2020. What happened? Well, what happened was that it hit the block size limit. And suddenly, you put a cap on your on-chain transactions. And one can hypothesize what’s going to happen here. This is what you expect from Metcalfe’s law, which is between 1 and n and the square.

And we’ll go back to the question for Monero, we’ve played 60,000 times. But we think about Bitcoin for a moment. So what is happening? What’s the anomaly here? What happened in that period, 2015 – 2020 was this gap set. So we see the Bitcoin economy, and I would suggest the most likely model, is the Bitcoin economy moved from decentralized ledgers to the centralized ledgers of exchanges. So people were depositing Bitcoin in exchanges, using it as collateral to speculate on other transactions or simply holding it in exchanges, and they weren’t transacting on-chain. So we’ve moved from a decentralized blockchain economy to one that is essentially a banking economy where the collateralized asset becomes Bitcoin rather than USD.

A great example of this might be the Сhiva Wallet in El Salvador, where in fact the government sets up this wallet, buys a whole bunch of Bitcoin, and then turns around and creates a effectively something that looks to many ways like a CBDC backed by Bitcoin. The wallets were actually linked to the idea of the individual user. And how is this different in many respects from the gold standards of the 19th century where you had gold in a bank and the bank would issue receipts for the gold and that was the money? So it’s essentially the same thing. You just replace gold with Bitcoin. But that’s the kind of things that can be happen.

So for Monero, possibly where we would expect on the linear and true for Bitcoin, and many questions. And again we have the question of the prices of Monero and other cryptocurrencies, like that of any asset. Now, I actually, and this is why the disclaimer question is very interesting, may be influenced by the madness of people that can complicate the results. I made a financial decision in 2014 – 2015 to sell my Bitcoin for Monero over this very issue, because I realized: “Wait a minute, this thing is supposed to be decentralized. They’ve put a cap on the block size. Well, that’s going to cap the value if it stays decentralized. So I better sell my Bitcoin for Monero”. And it was a wise decision. But not what I expected. I mean, I doubled the value by holding Monero rather than Bitcoin in that period of time. But I would have expected much more. And the reason it didn’t happen is because what I didn’t take into account was the hidden portion of the Bitcoin economy, which is bank-based, exchange-based. So you make a financial decision, it makes sense on the surface, but then you turn around and find out there’s something else you didn’t take into account. So this is why it’s very important, this is not financial advice. You have a theory, you make a financial decision, but wait a minute, I didn’t take account of this. But fundamentally what I’m saying is I think your question is with Bitcoin with respect to is it really decentralized, and is it really what it was designed to do.

And so for questions and discussion.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._

_**Francisco:**_ So, any questions?

_**Question:**_ Lightning would also contribute to that for Bitcoin, right? Because that’s movement that doesn’t show up on chain.

_**Francisco:**_ That is correct. But what you have to take into consideration is the market capitalization of Lightning, vis-a-vis the market capitalization of Bitcoin. The amount of Bitcoin in Lightning is roughly about 100 million dollars, versus the 500 billion dollars market cap of Bitcoin. So yes, in theory, Lightning would work well for that, but it doesn’t explain the discrepancy just because of the size of the Lightning Network.

Now, it’s quite possible the Lightning could be used as an on-ramp to a centralized wallet. And that’s another interesting application. It’s not really the intent of Lightning, but you would have like a centralized wallet and you would fund it through Lightning. That’s possible. But again, it’s just too small right now.

_**Question:**_ Artic, thank you for this fascinating talk. I have a question. So we’re comparing Monero to Bitcoin for the most part here. And for someone who’s just getting into cryptocurrencies, should they be looking at some of the smaller privacy projects who are looking to overtake Monero?

_**Francisco:**_ Well, again, this is not financial advice. The first thing I will look at evaluating any cryptocurrency project, whether it involves privacy or not, is two things. Does it have a fixed number of coins? If you have a pretty proof-of-work coin with a fixed number of coins on falling block rewards, you have exactly the same problems than in Bitcoin. So you’re not going to solve that problem with something like Zcash, for example, which is more than Monero. Pirate Chain, another example. I mean, they may have, quote, better privacy and some limited interpretations. But if they don’t have not addressed the fundamental issues of scaling and of security, which Monero has addressed and Bitcoin has not, then the answer is no.

I have really found nothing that I like in the crypto space right now other than Monero, to be honest. Possibly Ethereum, but again, they have so many questions of proof-of-stake. I’m not a believer in proof-of-stake. I mean, personally, my personal opinion to diversify is a look at things like gold or even USD. And the other thing to watch with a lot of projects is are they really web3 or are they really decentralized? Because I’m fine with banks that are honestly regulated and are called banks. I’m fine with cypherpunk to truly be centralized. But when you have an insolvent bank masquerading as a cypherpunk, I do not wanna go near it.

It was a very famous case, FTX. Billions of dollars lost. The single largest, but maybe the single most money laundering case in United States history. You know, I would say, well, that could have been avoided by securing the money in Monero. But the point that I’m getting at is that there’s a lot of stuff out there that I would not even go close. So my answer in general would be no. I always sounded like a maximalist. If someone can show me something that’s addressed, not just privacy, but all these critical issues, then that’s what I would say.

_**Moderator:**_ Any other questions?

_**Question:**_ I have one more if I’m allowed to. I’m wondering about your take on the role of B in that famous equation. Especially, it seems like with Bitcoin, or if something’s deflationary and people are holding it, that B term actually changes, and that needs to be taken into consideration too. Just wondering.

_**Francisco:**_ In my opinion, that is a legitimate, very legitimate, it’s a very good question actually. It comes down to the time cycle. Over a long time cycle, I would say B will come back. For a short term, particularly if it’s a speculative frenzy, absolutely B would change. So it’s quite possible that it’s also, in the case of Bitcoin, B has driven up, a reduction velocity is driving it up, and that could be consistent with a speculative frenzy — people buying the coins and just holding up them and not trading or anything simply for that reason. So in the short term, yes, B is a very critical point. And it could be part of this, so what we’re saying here, it’s not just banking, maybe it’s just speculation. That’s even, I think, scarier than my thesis, but it’s a legitimate one, a very legitimate one. And that what we really are seeing is just unfounded speculation as opposed to banking on centralized ledgers. I’m taking a more, shall we say, charitable approach by saying it’s banking on centralized ledgers as opposed to just rampant speculation. But it’s definitely quite possible. Any more questions?

_**Moderator:**_ We have a question here.

_**Question:**_ Hi, man. I have a question regarding the total fixed supply.

_**Francisco:**_ Sorry?

_**Question:**_ I have a question regarding the total fixed supply of coins. Don’t you think that, for example, regarding Monero, with that 0.6 XMR per block, do you think looking far in the future it will be enough to secure the chain? Or do you think it might have to increase someday because the inflation will go lower and lower and maybe 0.6 XMR will not be enough to be as secure as today.

_**Francisco:**_ It’s a valid question. What we’re asking here is the last coins will be so low that for example we would double the supply in 100 years. So what do you do in 100 years supply. I think that the stabilized number is going to be something’s going to be a lot closer to the current money supply, it might be twice as much, which still you’re looking at an effective block reward of half of that.

The question that you raised is interesting because if you want to look at a coin that really got into trouble with this was Bytecoin. And they basically had to give up the goal at around a tenth of Monero in a supply. So it would actually take about a millennium actually to do that. But yes, it’s possible we could stabilize at a higher number than the sort of nominal 18 million dollars. It’s also possible it could be just about that figure or a bit lower.

Other interesting data on this we can look at is what is the loss rate of cash, for example, in the United States. It’s in that bullpup figure, actually slightly higher. So that means how many coins get lost pennies put in the bottom of sofas and that kind of stuff, and bills that get destroyed and so on. In gold, there’s some evidence for the last gold, and it’s definitely lower than 0.6 percent. So I would say that the stability point is going to be between I would say within say twice to three times the existing amount or below the existing one. Question?

_**Question:**_ I was just thinking, wouldn’t the stabilization point be a function of how many people actually own Monero? Because if you think that the rate of loss is like a probability per person who owns Monero, so if more people own Monero, then the rate would increase.

_**Francisco:**_ So you’re saying as adoption increases, the rate of losses would increase?

_**Question:**_ The total magnitude of loss would decrease because the average amount held per person would be lower.

_**Francisco:**_ Well, if the average per person is lower, I would actually argue that you gotta look at market cap as opposed to the amount of Monero.

So if we’re assuming massive adoption, then you’re also gonna have a very significant increase in market cap. And the loss rate might be comparable. Because they’re losing, the people have a lot less Monero, they’re worth a lot more. So they’re taking more care of it. It’s an interesting question, if more people own it, is it gonna be a faster or lower rate? And therefore, how is it gonna stabilize over time? So is it gonna reach a stability point and then kind of drift lower and then find a lower stability point because of adoption? It could be very likely, absolutely.

_**Question:**_ When comparing privacy preserving cryptocurrencies, what do you think about the argument that it’s important to hide in the biggest crowd? There’s two trains of thoughts here. The one is that the number of daily transactions is one of the most important properties of a privacy coin, so to speak. The other one is just the purely technical privacy properties of that coin. So for example, Zcash might give you technically, better privacy on a per transaction level. But in terms of the crowd you’re hiding in, that’s not necessarily the case. So how do you decipher that?

_**Francisco:**_ Okay. We can give you another more extreme example, Ethereum. Having not much privacy on chain. But you have this 12 terabyte blockchain. Do you want to do blockchain surveillance on Ethereum? Why are you going to drown in the Ether? I mean, that’s an extreme example. We have very little privacy, but a humongous chain. Size of the blockchain does help, as does the privacy islands within it. By that I mean, you know, you have one type, type one transaction, one output, or two outputs, that kind of thing. Sorry, one input or two inputs. So yes, there is a dynamic between the two. As you grow a blockchain, you make it more private for a given privacy technology. That’s definitely the case. You’ll have to deal with the question that if you’re going to do blockchain surveillance, it scales as the binomial coefficient. Because essentially what you’re doing, let’s say you’re tainting some k outputs out of n. Well, the normal ways you can choose k out of n, is basically the binomial coefficient. n factorial divided by k factorial minus k factorial. So that’s going to give you the binomial coefficient. So blockchain surveillance scales very badly. So even relatively low privacy could actually provide privacy issues by the sheer mass of it.

And so when you’re comparing privacy technologies, this is why Monero is way more private than Zcash. Yes, on an individual transaction, Zcash is not, the Zcash is better. But when you factor in that it’s a very small pool because it’s also an opt-in pool, and then you add to the fact then Monero’s got a much higher transaction rate and it’s mandatory, then the ring signatures in Monero are better than what you get in Zcash.

One of the things to understand, if you have the whole pool as your mixset, it’s still a finite mixset. So you gotta look, for example, what happens if I churn Monero and I run out of enough times with 16 outputs, when we get to the point, then it’s gonna exceed the total number of outputs in the blockchain, I’m going to actually access the whole blockchain in my mixing. Because it’s basically, you know, you’re going to mix it to the one, to the two, to the three, to the four, etc. It’s a finite number of outputs in the chain. So yes, absolutely the size is relevant. Question?

_**Question:**_ Yeah, just a quick question. I know you were talking about fixed versus floating supply. How do you see something like Ethereum with its new kind of EIP-1559 model where they burn some of the supply when transactions are performed on the chain? Because ostensibly they have a floating supply, but then they have deflationary aspects to it because they’re burning transactions.

_**Francisco:**_ So could you repeat that again?

_**Question:**_ Yeah, I’m just curious about what your view of the current Ethereum model is, which is to have a floating supply, but then also have transactions which burn Ethereum irreverently.

_**Francisco:**_ Right, right. What they’re doing is they’re burning Ethereum. And then the question that you need to ask is how does it affect… First of all, Ethereum is now proof-of-stake. So are we actually reducing the staking amount? If the staking amounts are constant and you accept, and this is a big exception, that the proof-of-stake is equivalent to proof-of-work, which I don’t want to buy. But what I would say is they can then reduce the supply by burning coins. I mean, a simple example of that. And then the answer is yes. I mean, that’s a that addresses security problem in Bitcoin while keeping the maximum limit. The one example interesting coin that did this kind of died. Why is still around. I think it’s called Frycoin. And what they did is they created a diminished currency. And what happened is they had a similar amount of demurrage, which is also the block reward. So you had a constant total of coins. They were burning it out through demurrage. And that was a block reward, so you had a constant supply. So that’s the other way. So burning it through transactions, which is the case of Ethereum, yes, you could actually create something where you reduce the supply while at the same time maintaining the security. So you just have an easy way to do it.

Now again, I got a precarious, I’m a big skeptical proof-of-work, sorry, proof-of-stake. I may be proven wrong on this, but I am really a skeptical of that. But if you consider the same model on a proof-of-work currency, then that would be the answer.

_**Question:**_ So the cap supply is one design choice of a cryptocurrency. Another is having a pre-mine or a dev tax. Do you think that’s a centralizing force in a cryptocurrency or how does that affect the long-term value of a coin that you’re looking at?

_**Francisco:**_ It is a highly centralized force in a cryptocurrency. And here’s where I would suggest, read the initial guidance from FinCEN in the United States on this very issue. The minute you have a dev tax, the minute you have a pre-mine, you’re crossing the boundary very close into money transmission. So now you have a legitimate argument for regulators such as FinCEN, I’m using as example. You also have major questions as to whether the thing is a security or not, because you’re now creating a pre-mine and selling it, and that can easily constitute a security. I would say that a very sizable percentage of cryptocurrencies have serious problems with all sorts of regulators on this basis that we don’t have.

So, for example, in Canada, there’s a whole bunch of assets that cannot be listed in Canadian exchanges because they consider securities. And that’s exactly this problem. Once you stop pre-mining, once you put your hands into the till in the old-fashioned way, stick your hands into the till, touch that money supply, and decide I’m going to spend it on this or I’m going to spend it on that, that is centralizing. Because somebody’s making that decision. One thing about Monero is it’s everything is funded through donations. So it’s funded either people donating Monero and paying developers, developers donating their time, or hybrid situations where people pay Monero and the developer charges below the market rate. There’s also some variance of that, but ultimately it’s entirely funded by donations. So anything like that, major trouble. That’s my thought. And I think the regulators are cluing into this stuff.

_**Question:**_ Thank you. And to wrap this up, one final question to bring it back to the valuation question. So as we’ve seen, there’s a huge herd instinct in crypto investing. People invest in the biggest thing that’s out there. Bitcoin is always in the news. That’s all they hear about. So the first coin that a person buys is usually Bitcoin. So size matters and people follow the herd for the most part. So the other thing we discussed with privacy preserving cryptocurrencies is the tendency for people to want to hide in the biggest crowd, which right now is Monero. So combining these two herd instincts, one to hide in the biggest crowd and two to invest in the biggest thing that’s out there, do you feel that Monero is in a good position going forward or is there something that we need to be worried about or address?

_**Francisco:**_ Okay, let me answer two quick questions. First of all, following the herd for investing is a very dangerous game. It works for a while until you sell to the greatest fool and you are the greatest fool. And then at the top, you get slaughtered. And as the old adage, pigs get slaughtered, bears make money, bulls make money. And I supply the pigs that can be bear pigs and bull pigs because I’ve seen it also done the other way around at the bottom. So herd investing is a prescription for bankruptcy.

Now, picking the largest one from a perspective of privacy, yeah, there’s a fundamental reason you want to do that. And then you’re weighing, for example, the strength of the privacy versus the size of the chain. That’s certainly the case. So that’s a legit truth. There’s one fundamentally valid one and one fundamentally that is not.

Long-term, the biggest threat that I honestly see with Monero today is the issue of blockchain surveillance and particularly the blockchain surveillance companies. Because here what you’ve got is a bunch of companies that are built a business model about tracking transactions on Bitcoin and Ethereum that they can’t really do. And in fact, we had a speaker yesterday on this very subject that it doesn’t work. And I’ve been saying this for quite a while. But nevertheless, I’ve done a really good sale jobs on regulators. So for example, in the European Union, they’re pushing to ban Monero from exchanges. That’s gonna have an impact on price. The flip side is if they get called to task legally, which they could, then that will flip the other way. So I think that’s the biggest negative that Monero has right now, herd mentality on Bitcoin doesn’t concern me as much because that corrects itself.

But definitely the blockchain surveillance industry is a major threat to Monero, especially, and the thing you keep in mind with this. Let’s say you all wanna go off grid. Well, so you have your Q for Monero, and now you say: “Okay, there’s a whole bunch of people that are doing KYC exchanges and all this kind of stuff, and a bunch of people that are off grid. If you don’t kill that portion of Q that’s KYC, the Monero network doesn’t know if a transaction is KYC or not. I put it to you that if you eliminate KYC use of Monero, there’ll be inflation, at least temporarily, in the non-KYC side of Monero, because you’ve reduced the overall Q. So that’s the argument that I would make. So if you think that you’re gonna be insulated from a disruption like this because you’re off grid, I’m saying no you’re not. You’re gonna suffer inflation as a result of this. You understand, I’ll end it with that.

_**Moderator:**_ Any other questions? That’s, oh, can you come, sorry. The cable’s not long enough.

_**Question:**_ Thank you. So how do you think about the psychological impacts of inflation on money? In a, for example, relatively low but positive inflation incentivizes people to spend their money in the economy. Conversely, deflation encourages people to hold. So how does Ethereum sort of make that state change from sort of this investable asset with a deflationary supply.

_**Francisco:**_ I mean, I mean, a couple of interesting complex questions, because first of all, if you look at the case of Monero, a people are not Monero is not being used in isolation. So you have people that are dealing with inflationary money and would use going to Monero to spend just to cut down the friction. This comes back to the saleableness aspect of. So it’s not just driven by Monero, it’s driven by the inflation of the fiat currencies. And the fact that you can eliminate your transaction friction, your transaction cost in Monero. So that’s going to create action in Monero, quite irrespective of its own economy, as far as inflation is concerned. I don’t know the case of Ethereum. I think that’s more of a use case, where you actually want to do stuff on it. And I don’t think it’s, people are going to spend Ethereum if they want to do stuff on Ethereum. They might turn around and say: “I want to use MATIC or Polygon”. In fact, I attend an Ethereum group in Vancouver on a regular basis and that’s what they’re doing. They say: “Oh, it’s also about Ether, but then we get down to it. Oh, we want to run a beverage machine and run Polygon on it”. So it’s sort of the equivalent of having a meetup like this in Ethereum. But then when you go to the vendors, they take Polygon. So I mean, you are not living in icelands here.

_**Moderator:**_ Thank you, ArticMine.

_**Francisco:**_ You’re welcome.