# Yessica Ortega

_**Architect & Professional Monero Fighting Queen**_

[https://youtu.be/vBLWCJKVi-s](https://youtu.be/vBLWCJKVi-s)

---

_**Doug:**_ Welcome to Monerotopia!

_**Sunita:**_ Well, greet you, people.

_**Doug:**_ Guys we're blown away by the amount of participation in this conference, and our hearts are worn by it, Monero hearts or digital cash hearts. I think this is a great night for Monero, this is a great implication for digital cash at large. There's a lot of people that are genuinely interested in the movement, and we're seeing it in the physical. We have a ton of amazing projects, this isn't just of a Monero focused conference. I'm sure you guys all know today it's going to be kind of more high level stuff, philosophical zoomed out talks about the importance of concepts of opting out of state control, fiat society, we have a few talks on that, and so it's just kind of a warm-up for getting people to understand why something like Monero even matters. So that's what today is really focused on. Tomorrow is going to be focused on the Monero itself. It's going to be a full day of talks from the Monero developers. There's gonna be talks going on in here, in this room, all day. There's going to be talks going on in the loft area. Those are going to be remote talks. And it's a ton of amazing, amazing speakers, I mean these are the people that are actually developing the software. So these are the gods of the community, these are the heavy lifters, these are the ones that are doing all the real work.

So Sunita and I, it's a lot of work, we're the promoters of the concepts, we're believers in the concepts, but it's really the cypherpunks, the people behind the scenes, that are building it, that are most important. And we're honored that we have a lot of them participating in this conference. So another applause that you guys should be very excited about that. Thank you.

We could stand up here all day and, thank everybody, but it would make a very boring conference. At certain points in the conference you'll be, jumping into the today, bring certain people. I guess we have too much to take right, we have to take Cake Wallet. What's for Cake Wallet this wouldn't have happened. Really anytime we've reached out to them with one of our crazy ideas that we want to do to help grow the movement, Vic, who is the founder of Cake, as always he said 'Okay', he's always been on board. So super big round of applause to Vic. We also have the use case of Cake Wallet all the time, so the first open source item as Monero wallet, but we won't get into that. I want to once again I want to thank everybody that came out to help us. I mean we had we've never met on the internet, reaching out saying they're going to volunteer, they want to help.

And I'm a Monero guy as all people are here, there's a small bugs right, there's always this is kind of this constant debate as in which one of these things has the most value. And I think there's one thing that's undebatable, that we all know has more valuable or more value than anything else, which is our time. Time. Which is very, very limited. The fact that all of you were willing to sacrifice your time, whether you're helping out on the conference, or just travel to come here, be here, needs a ton of time. I mean the amount of value that's here in terms of people dedicating their time is really astronomical, it's tremendous. So once again thank you. Is there anything you wanna? Sunita likes to be behind the scenes, that's fine, and she does a lot behind the scene.

We're gonna open up, we're gonna let the venue, are they ready, we're gonna let the venue just say a few words about where's the world or earth today, just give you guys an idea of what this place is even about, and then we're going to have Andrey from Zano project. He's gonna come up. He's not gonna give a presentation, we're going to do a QA with them, with the audience. Andrey is an old school cypherpunk. I guess we'll tell you a little bit of his own story, but he's one of the original Cryptonote guys. And so we're going to take 40 minutes here to asking the questions we have about the genesis of Monero. I know I'm certainly on that topic, anybody else here interested in that topic? All right, cool. Anybody who's gonna have questions for Andrey? All right, yeah, start thinking of questions now. This is extremely valuable person we have up here. I want to thank his ride, I want to find out I mean how he got involved, what really happened in the early days of Cryptonote. So let's be sure without further ado bring up the venue, director of Huerto, and they'll give a brief talk about them.

_**Venue:**_ Hello, we are Huerto Roma Vedrde, we are laboratory for experimental'

We take care of the nature, earth, animals and air.

You can follow us in huertoromaverde.org and also through our networks, social networks ' Facebook, Instagram, Tik-Tok. Well, thank you so much.

_**Doug:**_ Okay, so you guys can go up to them and ask them more questions about what's going on here. Please do that. They are the part of the local Monero here. Just all of us are already in the crypto, in the Monero, and you want to spread the word out to others and try to get them to understand the importance of crypto, why we're all anti-fiat. Are we all anti-fiat? Can we all agree on that in this room? A lot of people are already having Monero here, because we agree that we're all anti-fiat. Anybody not anti-fiat, if you're if you're brave enough to raise your hand? Okay, all right, just get, probably not brave enough to raise your hand.

All right so she just actually showed up, we're gonna have Yessica come up. She is a local to Mexico City, she is a UFC fighter, she is a, I don't know, she's a Monero maximalist, but she's likes Monero, she uses Monero, she sponsors My Cake Wallet for her UFC fighters. We want to have her come and kind of give the pull to next, to little speech, all right.

_**Yessica:**_ Hi guys. I'm Yessica Ortega, and I'm glad to be here, because, I live here, in Mexico, I have my apartments here, so my response to my first sponsor is Library uh introduced me to the crypto. So I in that moment, I didn't know what is crypto. So after that I'm now I know what is Monero I get on it and I'm sponsored now. So it's amazing to know Monerotopia here in Mexico City, because old in Las Vegas. So a crypto there's, no sorry, the currency because I have a privacy and routine is very easy to use. For example my sponsor always has own Monero. So do they use it or the cryptocurrency is easy. So for me Monero is a good experience, and to the UFC fighter so I introduce it in the sports, so, for example, the sponsor in the UFC is a crypto now. So I think the crypto is the future is and as the sponsor is a very, very interesting. So welcome to Mexico and Monerotopia, to the big conference, and if you have a question ' I'm here.
