# Daniel Vázquez

_**Enhancing Privacy for All Humanity**_

[https://youtu.be/Xplljacdwzo](https://youtu.be/Xplljacdwzo)

---

_**Doug:**_ All right. We have, next up we have Nym, and we have Daniel, who I believe is kind of local to the area, and he’s going to be doing a presentation on it in Spanish. Thank you so much, man.

_**Daniel:**_ You’re welcome. Como van vleuk? Ho. Yes, how to.

_**Moderator:**_ Okay. Yep, there you go.

_**Daniel:**_ Yes. Hello, hello. Hi, how are you doing? I’m Daniel, I’m the head of growth for Latin America of Nymtech. I’m going to do this presentation mainly in Spanish, although if there are any questions I could answer in English. But there are also quite a few people from the Mexican and Latin American community who asked me to do the presentation in Spanish. So, with respect to the rest of the friends, we are going to do it in Spanish. And if anyone has any questions, I think that seeing the presentation, you can understand a little, you can do it and I can answer in English or we can talk later too.

Well, introducing myself very quickly, I have been participating in free software communities for a long time. I have been a member of a hacker laboratory. We took buildings, which are the grass of financial speculation in the center of Madrid, and we released them so that the neighbors could use them until they fired us. It usually lasts a process of approximately two years. And inside we built hacker laboratories, we gave workshops on artificial intelligence, robotics, development with Python, Rust and various technologies as they have emerged, even communication workshops with social networks, as they have become famous, having an impact, etc.

Also, in my free time, well, I am also a founding partner of Decidim, which is the most used citizen participation platform in the world. It is an open source platform that was commissioned by the City of Barcelona, but which also uses the city of New York. I am a member of the Open Knowledge Foundation. I participate from Ecuador, giving advice on open data, open government, some institutions, and in my spare time, the few I have, I train Amazon pilots in photogrammetry with drones for territorial control and problems with mining, oil companies, illegal tala, etc. territorial invasions in the indigenous communities of the Equatorial Amazon.

We talked about privacy being the next paradigm, that the massive surveillance by governments will only increase. You’ve seen it, you know it, that this is happening, that it’s a reality, and that there are people working to avoid this problem from many different fronts. There’s the blockchain and Web3 front, but there are other fronts where people are working on these technologies.

And unfortunately, although it can be an advantage at this moment, it is also a model that generates work opportunities and that can generate economy. Because privacy is a value that will be at the top in the coming years, which it already is, but it also generates business opportunities and that, as you know, in the 70s and 80s, There was a series of social movements around cypherpunk that worked on the development of technologies, thanks to which today we have Monero, today we have Bitcoin, today we have the blockchain chain. And it is all thanks to that generation of 30 years ago that they worked thinking that privacy was going to suffer serious damage with the arrival of the massive use of digital networks. Very futuristic people. Some of them are today stuck in the blockchain world. We have other prisoners in prisons, like Julian Assange. We have other temporary prisoners, but they are already free, like Chelsea Manning. And others are working in multinationals in the sector, or they have abandoned the social part of these technologies, or they have simply been enriched savagely, and they are dedicated to living a happy life and not working, which is not so bad either.

So we can see that privacy will also generate a lot of economic opportunities to develop. In Nym we say that the Internet is broken, and it’s a phrase we repeat a lot. But it’s not that it’s broken because someone has fallen for it. The Internet is broken because it was designed broken. The Internet was never designed thinking about the privacy of people. It was designed to guarantee communications in very complex scenarios where part of the network could collapse, and yet they wanted the rest to continue to work. From there Internet is designed to identify all the communications that are made. And it was never thought of with privacy in mind. It never had the privacy of people in the center of its design. That’s why we say that the Internet is broken. Because from the perspective of privacy and anonymity or the right to privacy of people, Internet is possibly the most perfect machine that has ever existed to identify people. And this is a reality that can be seen when you study the protocols and how TCP/IP works, and the information and the metadata that they generate when you communicate.

And right now, no solution that exists can protect you against global actors, what we call in technique those who have Gold Mode, those who have God Mode on the network, the people who see the totality of a telecommunications network. No existing solution can protect you from actors as high-level organized crime, American intelligence agencies, governments like Russia’s, like China’s, people who have control of a network and who want to know perfectly who does what, at what time, and be able to identify people. And there’s nothing right now that can be done to solve that, because the metadata are the ones that identify you very easily when you communicate.

Metadata are some data that you generate in TCP/IP, which is the Internet language, when your machine communicates with another, you generate some metadata where, and they are not encoded, they are public data. And they identify the source of origin, the IP address of origin, the IP address of destination, the port, and the number of packages that are going to be communicated. An actor who sees the whole network is able to see that 300 packages have come out of my computer with these sizes and that 300 packages with these sizes have entered your computer. So it’s able to see who’s talking what at every end.

Nowadays, analysts from the National Security Agency say without any shame or hiding, they say it in public, that they don’t need the data, or they don’t want to be given the data. They want to be given the metadata. And with that, they are able to know who’s talking to who and what. And they have a thousandth of the amount of data they need. They handle it with much less data volume, they can work more efficiently and they know exactly the same as they capture all the traffic of information.

And the solutions that exist now, VPN or Tor, do not fix the problem. I love Tor. I use Tor today, I use it every day. And I’ve been using it for more than a decade. And I have colleagues who work in Tor. But Tor is broken. And it’s something that’s public. And Tor, in the end, only uncovers the IP of origin from the IP of destiny. That is to say, hides the IP of the communicator from the one receiving the communication. But that doesn’t help you to protect yourself at the metadata level. And the VPNs, in the end, only transfer trust to a third party actor, who can be easily corruptible, buyable or forced by law to facilitate data and to participate in espionage.

So there is a need for privacy. Tor shows that there is a need. The number of users of nodes, the 1,500 nodes, the terabytes that it manages. Tor has public data that you can find in statistics if you go to the Tor website. And you will see that there is a demand for millions of people, hundreds of thousands of people, who need that privacy.

When Tor reached its ceiling, the next thing that shows us that there is a demand for privacy was the growth of Signal, especially after the revelations made by Edward Snowden, the increase in the use of Signal is exponential. And that shows that there is a market and a need for privacy. But both projects lack a model called anti-fragile, of financing or management, and they are attackable not only by the technological process, but through more sophisticated ways of social, financial or political engineering to attack a project of those characteristics and weaken it.

So we have a solution that, in the face of all this analysis, we propose that we need to look for something that solves this and we find a way, a way that is based on the, well, on three main legs. It is a decentralized, incentivized Mixnet with more private creditors. Basically, you have it there. It is a Mixnet, the tokens and the credit. Those are the three tools. We are going to talk a little bit about how these tools work. And why do we believe that with them we can collectively tackle this problem and put privacy back as a default option, increasingly in the global communication system.

The Mixnet is a mix network. It is an information theorem from the 80s that has continued to develop. Tor is a mixnet. It is a mix network. A lot of servers and computers that mix packages and camouflage the origins.

The Nym token is our reward system for the issue we were talking about, the anti-fragile system, an anti-fragile financing system that protects the project. When we say this, it is because both Tor and Signal have been subjected to financial pressures that have been temporarily solved, in the case of Signal, even with donations from the CEOs or the founder himself, but that needs to be more economic models to guarantee that it will be sustained. And we have found this one — using the tokens.

And then the credit system is a zero-knowledge system so that we don’t want to know who our clients are. Basically, that helps to facilitate the privacy of people.

The Mixnet is a network that makes multiple jumps. Traffic is routed through the Mixnet and, in a similar way to Tor, it is responsible for making those packages jump from one side to the other. But we add three layers of extra privacy. Apart from a decrypted system, we add three layers, which is what makes it different from the other mixnet.

The first one is that we add cover traffic, fake packages. Basically, among the thousands of TCP/IP packets that you send in real, we introduce a lot of false packets. The second is that we modify, we do timing of fuscation, we modify the timing of the packets. We modify the time, we delay it so that they do not go in order. And the third, well, there is the horizontal scalability, that is, by adding more nodes, this scales, but there is one that is not reflected because apart from covering traffic and modifying the time, we also modify the packages so that they all have the same size and you cannot analyze traffic patterns of the packages that are in circulation. Because many times, by analyzing those patterns, you can find out who is behind those communications. If we equalize the packages and put them of the same size, all of this is complexed and it is really very complex to be able to trace the origin of a person from the beginning of that communication.

And well, there is a small graph so that you can see how the Nym Mixnet is compared with a VPN and Tor. Basically, we equalize the packages and put in false packages and the packages are anonymized in such a way that you can’t even see the metadata. I don’t like this drawing because I have to update it in the last part where it says Nym. You can see that the packages have different sizes when they come out of your computer, and it’s not like that. When they come out of your computer, the packages are already anonymized. When you put them in circulation by a telecommunications operator, the packages no longer have the metadata visible for the operator about where you’re really going to go. That’s not there anymore.

I don’t have time for the full presentation and to go deep, but you can see that the user starts talking. There are some TCP/IP packages. In their own computer, the packages are seen to be anonymized. They go through Mixnet, which makes them jump between several computers in different parts of the world. And that’s where coverage traffic also gets involved and time defusion. And there are some nodes that are active and there are some nodes that are not active. Currently we have 500 nodes and of those 500, 240 are the ones that are active and compete among themselves for being active. They compete with several parameters that we will see later because what we are looking for is that it has a lot of quality, that this serves to guarantee that the nodes that are active are the best and that the service for people works super well. And for that, the uptime of the nodes is measured and the staking, because this is connected to a blockchain, we will see it now, that people make those nodes, it is another parameter. And finally, they are normalized and reach the other end.

There is another technology that we will see later, is that we not only have the mixed nodes, we also have some gateways and some validators and the gateways, you can mount one on each end. For example, I have an office in Sao Paulo with 50 computers and I set up my gateway inside the firewall. And I have another office in Guadalajara and I have 10 computers and I set up another gateway behind the firewall. And I tell my computers to go for my gateway, not for another gateway. It’s free software, you can set up your own gateway and tell your clients that circulates only through that gateway. And that way, all the entire traffic is like a VPN, but with steroids and distributed, and with different security layers. And rewarded. Now we’ll see a little bit about the rewards.

The Nym token. With the Nym token you can do staking, because the mix nodes and validators use the tokens to ask for the reputation. It’s what we were talking about a moment ago. That staking is used to evaluate the quality of the node and to know more about the right to be on and to mix more time.

And then there is a proof-of-mixing. We are not used to knowing proof-of-stake or proof-of-work. We work with something a little different, an innovation that is proof-of-mixing. The rewards in tokens are delivered to the nodes by mixing packages and the more parts they mix, the more tokens they receive. And the value of Nym we associate it with the value of privacy. The value we understand that it will increase the token depending on the increase in the value of privacy for people. And we understand that this is a recurring thing and that it will only circulate in one direction and that is the increase in value.

There is a whole topic of economy, of crypto economy, and we have a paper on the website, you can find it, the tokenomics paper is quite complex, it is full of mathematical formulas. There we have our scientific head, Claudia Diaz, who is a bit the one who has led all that project. But there is a whole system of management, of economic incentive with tokens so that there is a distributed ecosystem of nodes that we do not control, of validators that we do not control, and of gateways that we do not control but to those who are rewarded and are worth keeping the services on to offer protection and privacy to more people. The user will use the tokens as a network access system. Right now the network is open for people to try it out, the Mixnet works, it’s operational and it’s free.

We gave a workshop a couple of hours ago explaining how to install, interconnect and how to pass the traffic of your applications through Mixnet to anonymize it. In fact, today we have published news that Monero can be used through Mixnet. We already have a gateway and a developer who has prepared it and the traffic of your Monero wallet can be routed through Mixnet and guarantee that no one can trace the origin of the transaction that you have made. Because Monero can offer you some privacy, but when you go online, you’re sold. You’re sold by the problem of metadata. In the end, the telecommunications operator can identify the connection’s origin point. And the good news is that this works and we’ve done the test and it’s really working.

Then there are the mixed nodes, which are the ones that are rewarded depending on the package mix, the validators, which ensure that the rates are paid and are rewarded in Nym tokens proportionally to the amount of participation and the work done, and the service providers, where the Nym tokens can be purchased to offer those services. Those are the parts of the Nym economic system.

And then Nym credentials. The creditials, we are finishing developing, although it works on tests, linked to access the mixed network without violating privacy. This is done with ZKPs, which is a system basically for anonymizing and validating users, because we don’t want to know who buys our services or who uses tokens to pay for this. The idea is not to have that information.

We have a proposal for the Internet, and that is that technological solutions must be designed with privacy in the center and taking the minimum amount of data, reducing the volume of data at the origin, or simply not taking data or trying to be 100% anonymous in your clients. The user can make a selective disclosure of their data, that is, they can validate and identify with a few data, with more data, depending on their wishes, and it is also decentralized. You don’t need a third party to request those credentials.

The Nym token flow is very small, as you can see, and it’s quite complex. Basically, the user starts by asking for the credentials, and then when he gets them, the validator gives him a pass so that the gateway allows him to make the traffic. Once he enters the mix nodes and moves packages, there’s an epoch that lasts approximately an hour, there are some reward bags that are distributed among all. And if someone wants to see the presentation in more detail, they can ask me and we can make it easier for them. We have it in English too, I have translated it for the friends who speak Spanish.

Regarding the Nym ecosystem, I don’t like this page much either, and I’m committed to changing it because it speaks from a very business perspective. And also the ecosystem is the community. Right now there are more than 500 people who maintain and manage nodes. There are about 60 or 70 gateways. There are a lot of test validators. It is a community that exceeds more than a thousand and more people as active technicians, including developers. And that has not been reflected in this presentation and that makes me a little bit of a shame. There you can see a little bit also the entities that have validated this project.

After a small stage of initial capital and the support of a Swiss telecommunications company, I don’t know if I have commented it, it is a Swiss company of blockchain and cybersecurity. We are not subject to the North American laws, but we are not subject to the European laws either. Switzerland is in the center of Europe, but it is not Europe in terms of legislation. It is an independent state. So, I don’t know if you have seen that many privacy startups have moved to Switzerland by Swiss laws to have greater tranquility in terms of complying with the law and guaranteeing the privacy of people. Protonmail, for example, which is the technology used by Snowden to move information, to filter what things that he finally decided to filter, and a lot of them are being transferred there.

We also had financing from Binance, A16Z and many people from the crypto world. But we also have many colleagues from the crypto universe, such as the people from SuperNodes or Validatrium and other organizations that help us develop technologies for Nym, such as the maps that reveal the blockchain so that you can see how many nodes there are, where they are, in what status they are, how much staking they have and all those details.

And when we talk about privacy as a business, it is. And the size of the business is spectacular. It is estimated that the market has more than 100 billion dollars of capacity and is divided into three large blocks, which are currently called VPNs, which is currently being used in crypto transactions, and in general, the privacy market, including consultants and auditors, etc., and that market is there.

And our clients or users are basically developers of apps, node operators and the end users. It is true that we are going to have a schizophrenic, delicate and a bit violent relationship with some of our clients or with some of our users. And this is inevitable and it is one of the things that raise my interest the most, how we are going to get out alive and not trapped by this process. Because obviously, some clients interested in this service are the intelligence services, who currently use Tor, but who know that Tor is broken and that they know that it does not cover everything that it has to cover. At the same time, they hate us, because they will also look for people who will use this Mixnet and that they will not be able to reach it so easily. And that will generate certain tensions with certain states.

And we’ll see how we solve all those tensions. But it’s a problem in which I’m delighted to participate. It’s one of the problems in life that one can presume to want to have, to have to fight with these people at that level. Another thing is how it can end and well, bring me cigarettes and chocolates and go to jail. We appreciate donations and support like Assange which we hope won’t happen, but it can happen.

But, obviously, there is a whole ecosystem of people in the crypto world who want privacy in their transactions. And this platform serves to offer them that privacy. And it’s real and it works. And it really works.

I don’t know if you know, for example, our colleague Chelsea Manning. She has already mentioned it before in the workshop. Chelsea was an analyst, an expert in artificial intelligence, but she was a data analyst in the army, North American. She was taken to the war front in the Iraq state military invasion. She saw a lot of evidence of war crimes and could not change it inside and decided to filter it to the press. The press did not pay attention to it and decided to filter it to WikiLeaks. You have already seen the video of the Apache helicopter executing journalists in the middle of Baghdad and a lot of war crimes that this girl revealed. Well, she was put in prison for 35 years. At the age of seven, Obama gave her a presidential pardon. She works with us as an analyst. Her expertise right now is focused on optimizing the hardware because she seeks to reduce the latency of the Mixnet, optimizing the hardware and cryptography of the system.

Edward Snowden has also helped us with some things. He participated in the presentation of the company in Paris a few months ago. Well, let’s say that they transmit a little to the community that there is a technology that is being taken seriously to solve the problem of privacy, which really could, at least at the level of communication link, solve a problem that has been technically unsolvable until today, but that is almost ready to start to propose a solution. And obviously, within that, many crypto companies, many banks, telecommunications companies are trying to start pilots to put their traffic through the only system that can protect the communications of their users, even at the metadata level.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._

_**Daniel:**_ Here we have an unreadable roadmap, and I’m sorry for this too, because it’s quite thick, but you can see a little bit that we started in 2018, that this project did not start yesterday, which has cost us almost five years, we have been five years within a few weeks, it has cost us almost five years to get here. It has not been easy to deploy the Mixnet, or the encryption technology, or the alteration of the packages, or the timing, or the validators, everything has been very complex, it has required a lot of people working. And the truth is that it’s not bad. You can see this on the web.

We also have the roadmap a little more updated, because I think it was updated a little while ago. We’ve been a couple of months behind on some things, but as you can see, and this is something that I love, and I don’t think it will be in 2024. I think it will be a little later. In 2024 we will try to present it. Another thing is when we manage to execute it. But we’re going to try to put this to integrate it into browsers and operating systems and standardize it in the Internet Engineering Task Force. If you don’t know it, the IETF is the organization that updates, maintains, and discusses the standards of the Internet protocols. If we manage to put it there, it’s a giant goal. Because from there, it’s super simple for developers, once they have a standard of the IETF. integrate it into a lot of different software platforms.

And well, there you have some of our social networks, in case you want to follow us and find out a little bit about the news, about the problems, about the mess and the joys that we are going to get into in the coming months and years. Basically, we use Telegram, we use Twitter and the web Nym to inform. There is another Twitter that is in English and has 60,000 followers. It has very few followers because we opened it a few months ago, like 500 or so. So if you help us spread it, it’s cool, because the more people get to know it, it will make it easier for us to speed up the process. And also my email, in case you need anything. I’m on Telegram’s channel, and you’ll see me talking there. So, well, that’s a bit of the project.

Also, let me tell you that we have Alexis Russell here, he’s the CEO of Nym. He was president of the Swiss Pirate Party for many years. He is an old cypherpunk legend. It’s his first time in Latin America, so you can ask him anything you want. He is a machine and he has many years of experience. He also spent many years in the UN as a lawyer and the experience of the Pirate Party in Switzerland is a very cool topic. You can also ask him.

And there’s Gustavo, I don’t know if he’s around, but Gustavo is our Community Manager. There he is. He lives in Guadalajara, here in Mexico. He’s a great partner, he knows the project perfectly and he can help you.

Finally, before leaving the questions open, I’d like to comment that we are launching a node delegation program because the nodes have been concentrated excessively in Germany and the United States. This is a project that aims to distribute security. We want to have nodes in other places, especially in Latin America, very few. And starting a node is a process that is difficult to achieve at the beginning, so that it is activated. We are going to choose 25 nodes to deposit 200,000 tokens to each of them, which is like taking a node up to 100%, to guarantee that it is turned on for 24 hours generating rewards. And that program started a year and a half ago, or two, and to register there are eight or seven days left. So you have to assemble the node that has to have IPv4 and IPv6, and fill in the form, introduce yourself, we will do a video conference and we will choose at 25 to do staking on the Nym tokens to help them get started.

And that would be all. Thank you very much for coming to meet us and listen to us. Nick? Let’s do a little demo? If someone helps us with the organization, we can put the computer to Alexis. In the meantime, I can answer your questions if you have any. Please.

_**Question:**_ Thank you very much. Really, please. you was talking about the Nym, that each package, let’s say 300 packages, come from the user to the server and you change the timing and the size of the packages. But a package has a public part, like the IP address, but there is another part inside that is encrypted like HTTPS. Please explain, how is it possible to change the size of the package if it’s encrypted? Explain me.

_**Daniel:**_ Well, we use Sphinx. We encapsulate the packages with Sphinx and assign the size we want. I don’t remember the exact size right now, but they all have the same. So what we do is encapsulate that in another standardized package of size. And it comes out directly encapsulated in this other Sphinx-type package. That’s the trick.

_**Question:**_ Ghosts, Quartets, and Wedding, and Nym?

_**Daniel:**_ Yes, we could put them together. Yes. All the solutions are open source. The main thing here is transparency and that everyone can see the code and that they can see how the system behaves to fully understand it. Because I’ve been working for a long time in telecommunications, managing firewalls and things like that, and I come from the network side. I’ve been working for a lot of years more oriented towards an organizational and marketing side. So there are things that I may not be able to answer with the latest information, but I know the technology in depth because I have been on telecoms for 30 years and I can tell you that it works more or less. I think it encapsulates in Sphinx-type packages and that is sent directly to the Sphinx. And the only thing that the operator can see is the Sphinx until it reaches the end and that is decapsulated and then it appears.

That’s why there is so much latency. The latency in our network is approximately 1200 milliseconds, sometimes 1000, sometimes 1400. Latency is the price you pay for privacy. Right now, it’s the only solution. But Chelsea is working precisely in this process to reduce latency.

If we have the time, okay, Alexis. Well, Alexis speaks four or five languages, but not Spanish. So, he’s going to choose English, which I think can be the most universal now to be able to explain the demo of how to connect your Monero wallet to Nym, the Mixnet, so that the traffic you make with your Monero wallet is already unreachable for telecommunications operators or for the or other actors who have global vision on the web.

Although I don’t know if you have any problems with the internet. One moment. Yes, because it is connecting to another Wi-Fi, I think. You don’t see it, but the connection is changing. Meanwhile, if there are any questions, tell me if any, I’ll try to answer you. There is a person in the background. Can you come here please? The mic is not wireless and it doesn’t have so much cable. Ah, great.

_**Question:**_ I was wondering if there are plans to allow a user to run a node in an opponent environment. For example, someone in Iran, if he wanted to run a node there would have problems and there would be plans to improve that experience.

_**Daniel:**_ In China, right now, if I remember correctly, there are 18 nodes in China. And there are few more complex places for information circulation than China. So, let’s say that behind the Great Firewall, the Chinese, I say it like this, instead of the Great Wall, the Great Firewall works. Yes, it’s true that the technology they have is tremendous. I mean, they are not just any opponent. And we did a mixnet test. We asked people to use the NymConnect to connect and send many photos by Telegram and big files. And it is true that in China, after a while, it began to give random failures that showed us that there were certain smart systems, automated working to stop the process. But half of the people worked and the other half didn’t. And there has been no repression on any side. So, until now, it’s tolerable.

As a whole, let’s see how much tension we’re going to generate to those people. And you can tighten the chain of freedom until it bursts somewhere. And at the moment, the issue is calm. But it is undoubtable that sooner or later, translate into actions. I don’t know if they will be legislative, I don’t know if they will be criminal or administrative, but without a doubt sooner or later, forms that guarantee the real and total anonymity of the people will be persecuted, at least in some states that have a hard control over their population. And in others they will do it in a way. Look, the first one that has attacked our community, so hard, has been the Foreign Affairs Control Agency of the Department of the Treasury which is the agency in charge of international sanctions to the Iranian Republican Guard, to the Russian oligarchs, to Cuba, etc. And those people have had the capacity to put the developer of Tornado Cash in Berlin in prison for six months without a charge. So we don’t know where the blows are going to take us, but the blows are going to come. That’s something we have to be clear about.

_**Alexis:**_ All right, thank you. I’ll just switch two minutes in English if it’s okay. And just first I’m looking, showing you the Monerod, which is running through the Mixnet. Yeah. So basically we’ll release, thanks to the community, some, thanks to some guys of the Monero, they’re not here, they’re in Switzerland, they made a Monerod server somewhere, which is that you can reach through Monero through the network Nym.

And basically here you have a very basic scenario. You have a NymConnect, which is connecting specifically on that gateway. You see here the logs of the NymConnect where you have all the traffic. And basically this node is connecting through this, through here, through the local proxy. So now I’m going to disconnect and reconnect to see if it works, right? So, it’s a bit complicated to go from here, but I’ll do like this. That’s your work. You’d take that? All right. I have to find my mouse first. Obviously. Ah? Somewhere here. Oh, yeah. Here. So I’m going to stop the Monerod, right? And I’m going to stop also NymConnect. So basically the first thing I want you to do, come on, if it goes. Why this guys... Come on. Troll B, C. Alright, I’ll just close down your window. I’m going to be a bit sorry for that a little bit, so...

Alright, so this is a very small app. You can download on our website. You just have to run it.

_**Question:**_ […]

_**Alexis:**_ Because it’s for Monerod, right now it’s not. We have a list of supported apps by default, which is Telegram, Keybase, Blockstream, and Electrum. We have like two sets of examples for wallets and for messaging apps. In the case of Monero, it’s like just new, but you see the instruction on our blogs post. You saw the blog post a bit before.

So basically here we have to add a service provider. Here. And that one starts with... Oh, you’re calling the wrong number. Not here. So basically, sorry. Okay, that’s this one. Sorry, it’s not very practical for now, but it’s just the first bit and then it will be included. And so basically here I’m connecting, I’m starting the Nym network and connecting to that specific node which is on the other side of the network. So now it’s connected.

I’m getting a health check. My NymConnect says: “I’m all good”. And here I can see it exposes a local port and a local address. So basically this one is like opening a port locally. And so when I’m going to use my Monerod, what I’m going to do is very simply, in the command line I’m going to add the proxy settings and the bootstrap proxy daemons to the same, to the local proxy.

And you will see, let me open up this. So right now, basically no one is using the NymConnect because yeah, I didn’t connect anything. And so as soon as I connect my Monerod, it will start and you will start to see a traffic going through a Nym. So now it’s looking for the peers connecting to the peers and now you have traffic, synchronization is starting. And I was up to date, so maybe I’m one or two blocks behind now but I’m starting to synchronize with a couple of nodes. So here we are, thank you very much.

So yeah, so basically what happens now, yeah. My ISP doesn’t know I’m using Monero. They don’t see anything from the Monero traffic. My node is just connecting through the Mixnet and yeah, there’s no way that they can decide, they can see from the other node or from analyzing the traffic where I am using this node right now here.

_**Daniel:**_ Okay, well, thank you very much. With this we finish. I hope it worked. I mean, it was the first time we tried it in public, so it had its possibility of not working. But hey, it came out cool. So nothing, thank you very much to all and everyone. Oh, one question, sorry. Right behind.

_**Question:**_ Yeah, I have a question for Alexis.

_**Alexis:**_ Sure, sure.

_**Question:**_ What changes would you like to see in the way that people think about privacy, and it’s important?

_**Alexis:**_ Can you repeat?

_**Question:**_ What changes would you like to see in the way that people think about privacy, and it’s important?

_**Alexis:**_ Oh, there’s a lot of things. But I think what is the most interesting thing now for me is that... Privacy is… The value of the data that we have and that we share is so important that if you have privacy, this value is kept within your network. And eventually networks of people or networks of organizations who remain private, they will have much more innovation and much more profit and value in the long term. Because if you live in a transparent world, which is very convenient and very risk-free, unifying everything and then you lose innovation and you lose new ways of progressing. So privacy is our only hope to keep on being innovative.

_**Moderator:**_ Thanks.

_**Question:**_ I have a question and I’m thinking of a company such as like Tesla coming into your house with their cameras and looking around. I think that’s a good privacy question. But my question is, how could someone, is this possible to run, use this just on your computer, passing data? Because I’m like, how does anyone use it? Or is it more like having a lot of computer structure? Do you need a lot of server?

_**Alexis:**_ No, the idea is that it’s going to be able to run it by anyone. And actually, most of the people might not know they’re using them. We already have websites. I’ll just give you a very short example here. Maybe a little very coming back. Here. Oh, that mouse is a mess. Yeah. So we have this demo website which is called PasteNym and that should work. Basically, this is a Pastebin, you know, Pastebin. You go on a website, you just take type text and then you store it on the backend. Well, here basically they did the same thing, it’s a community build thing, but it’s called PasteNym. And so you put text here, but there’s a client which is connecting, so here I’m running our clients with the Nym, with the NymConnect, but inside my browser, there’s another client running right now. And if I put text here, it will just be sent to the backend through Nym. So if we just hide that part, basically you can be using Nym without knowing it. So it should be accessible to everyone.

_**Daniel:**_ We have a question here. What can you do? Here’s a second landing. I forgot to hear it out. I don’t need this important. Well, I wrote it in Spanish, but now in English.

_**Alexis:**_ I’m sorry, we had the demo working and we didn’t want to... It took me time to prepare the demo, so that’s why.

_**Question:**_ I’ll go really fast. So, in regards to the hopes, you have a time for mixing, like is this a fixed time or can it be changed on the mixing?

_**Alexis:**_ To reach what? The speed you mean?

_**Question:**_ Yeah, there’s like a time for mixing or something like that.

_**Alexis:**_ Yes, so like every time, so there is, the packet will go through the mix lets and will go through three hops and every time there might be a small delay on each node, right?

_**Question:**_ And the time is variable or can you say that?

_**Alexis:**_ And the time is variable, yes. That’s why if you are sending 10 packets through the networks, they will not arrive at the same order on the other side.

_**Question:**_ So in terms of the consumption of processing power, if you’re going to have this in the token price on, if I may say like using the network, if you need to pay for service of routing the amount of time or something. Is it going to be like a tokenomics model, like gas consumption of Ethereum or something like that?

_**Alexis:**_ Right now the model is that it will be based on bandwidth, so how much gigabytes of traffic you’re pushing through the network. So the number of packets that you are sending through, not the speed, but the number of packets.

_**Audience:**_ Okay, thank you.

_**Alexis:**_ Because the speed, we’re trying to improve it and there is next week or soon. We are changing actually. So, Daniel was talking about the Sphinx packets. But the Sphinx packets, so it has an onion routing information and there is like a cryptography work, which is being done. And we have a new format of, which is similar to Sphinx, which will reduce by 50% the needs of cryptographic work on it. So, potentially we already have a 50% speed up there. What the people pay is not the speed because if you go slower, you’re more anonymous. So you’re paying the traffic in total.

_**Audience:**_ Okay. Thanks.

_**Moderator:**_ All you must connect to that.

_**Daniel:**_ Okay. So thank you very much and see you soon in the network. Bye-bye.

_**Doug:**_ All right. Thank you to Nym. Thank you guys. Thank you so much. Thank you.
