# Reuben Yap

_**Evolution of Firo's Privacy Protocols: From Zerocoin to Spark**_

[https://youtu.be/1xZPqMVvuoc](https://youtu.be/1xZPqMVvuoc)

---

_**Reuben:**_ Hello everyone, I am Ruben. I am the project steward of Firo. Because we are supposed to be decentralized, there’s no CEO or stuff like that. But basically we run, I run the day-to-day runnings of the project. And today we’re going to kind of run through how we started with Zcoin, which was I guess the first implementation of Zerocoin, and we messed up really badly, and I wanted to show and share how we move from what was probably kind of like naive ambition to try to employ, implement this very complex privacy protocols to what we have developed today. And we’ve gone through quite a few privacy protocols and learned in many times the hard way. I’m not technical, but I hope to share the story for that.

So a bit about me, you know, I am from Malaysia. I actually don’t come from a technical background. I was a lawyer for 10 years and just kind of like got into crypto in 2013, because I ran a VPN service and they were like cutting me off from all these privacy payment processes, you know, we were seen as doing something illegal kind of like in the same position privacy coins are today. And you know crypto seem to be offering this kind of like self-sovereignty. I’m able to accept uncensorable payments and that’s kind of how I got into crypto. I didn’t actually start in Firo as like a co-founder, even though sometimes I’m listed as one. I kind of came in like one month later helping out here and there and just kind of evolved into the role. So take note — I may make some mistakes on the technical thing, because you know I am legally trained, not cryptographically trained.

So you know Zcoin or Firo, Firo is the rebrand of Zcoin — it’s still the same chain. We actually switched mainnet in September 2016. And back then it was basically just two people, one guy called Poramin Insom, who has a computer science degree and was also doing his masters at John Hopkins University under Matthew Green, and the other guy was Gary Le, he was a Teal fellow and we can talk about it later, but basically he ran away with all our seed money. So that wasn’t a really good start. Really just two people, you know, Poramin was supposed to take care of all the programming and stuff like that, and his master’s paper was actually about a practical implementation of Zerocoin in the real world as there were some open issues that needed to be solved.

So you know back then, in 2016, actually, the whole idea — I think the Zerocoin paper was in 2014, so work was kind of done over two years by one developer, and finally we launched in 2016 — and back then, altcoins, they weren’t really doing very much. It was just like, change the block time, change the mining algorithm and stuff like that. So this was kind of like we were trying to do something different to implement real privacy for like, you know, like altcoins, right? And we actually started as a CPU mining focus, but we kind of got raped by still don’t know whether botnets or rented hatchery and stuff like that. And we pivoted away and now like, it’s kind of a hybrid consensus mechanism, which we’ll talk about later.

So what is Zerocoin, right? Zerocoin is not the same as Zerocash, which is used in Zcash. I guess, you know, I know like it’s a controversial, what do you mean by ZKP approach, but the idea that back then, you know, Zerocoin was this thing where you could basically destroy coins or put this into like some black hole. And then later on you could produce a ZKP that you burn these coins, and that allows you to redeem brand new coins with well looks like no previous transaction history. That’s kind of like a layman way to explain it. And it was originally actually meant to be a proposal for Bitcoin, but it had a lot of pushback. This was too new, this was too risky, which we find out that it actually is. And it was very clear that Zerocoin was not gonna be implemented in Bitcoin, and that’s why we kind of took it and decided to implement it in Zcoin.

So I guess back then when Zerocoin first came about, there were I think only like maybe two main privacy protocol systems, like kind of one which was like CoinJoin and the other one which was Ring Signatures. And I don’t think back then amounts were hidden yet, correct me if I’m wrong. So basically, you know, Zerocoin was this quite a like a very promising new privacy protocol. And unlike in ring signatures, you know, where you’re mixing with 8 or 16 or whatnot, Zerocoin offered a global anonymity set or at least within the fixed denominations. So what that means that no matter how many commitments you go in, it actually encompasses everyone who has decided to burn your coins into the Zerocoin protocol.

So it’s also uses standard RSA cryptography. There’s no fancy cryptographic assumptions. There’s no in the moon math, as they say. And I guess the idea behind Zerocoin, which I think maybe it’s kind of misguided, we thought that, you know, ZeroCoin offered more auditable supply than something like Zerocash, which was able to fully hide the amounts and had this whole shielded layer. Zerocoin was designed, remember, with Bitcoin in mind, so there was no separate addressing system. And what it allows basically burn and redeem back into the Bitcoin transparent addresses.

But you know, Zerocoin had a lot of drawbacks, right? I think when Zerocoin was first come out, it was like 50 kilobytes per proof, which was like ridiculously large. We then, I think it was, there was like revised papers that actually reduced this to 25 kilobytes, but even then it’s like really, really large, right?

It also had very, very long verification times. So what does verify, right? So in the ZKP, there’s a prover that create, that means I’m proving something, and that the verification is that when you’re checking whether this ZKP is proving what it says it is. So when you’re launching a blockchain network, obviously verification times are really important, because if your verification time is really long, it’s very hard to scale because your nodes have to be really, really powerful to process all these verification or transactions. And we’re talking in the range of like 400 milliseconds especially when you compare to like, I know I think things like Monero was like, you know 5-10 milliseconds or something like that, 400 milliseconds is a very long time. But the beauty of Zerocoin is that no matter how many people were burning into Zerocoin, that verification time was constant so it doesn’t grow as more people use it. So that was really good.

Because there was no method to hide amounts then or rather in this proposal it required the use of fixed denominations, same as in CoinJoin and anything that doesn’t hide the amount. So you would have to burn in 0.1, 1, 10, 5 or whatever to avoid standing out. So that was actually a very, very big drawback as it was very cumbersome as well.

So there were a couple of challenges to implement Zerocoin. First of all, it required the trusted setup. And Zerocoin’s trusted setup and Zerocash’s trusted setup is very, very different. If I’m not mistaken, Zerocoin, all it requires is a very large two prime numbers multiplied together and you take that big number, that’s the trusted setup. So it’s a lot more simpler, but there was no description of how to actually derive this number in a way that reduces trust, right? Because how can we be certain that we destroyed it, right? And so what the Zcoin team did, which was actually the subject of the paper of our founder, Poramin, was actually use certain, use the RSA factoring challenge, which was actually in 1991, and what the RSA factoring challenge was, was this competition to kind of see how strong was RSA cryptography? And they had RSA 2048, 4096, all this type of stuff. And they basically had a $200,000 bounty to break RSA 2048 and they’ll try to factor these numbers.

So instead of you doing our ceremony — which that means that we know that we’re creating a cryptocurrency, that means there’s now incentive to kind of backdoor this — here we just took something that was done way back in the past. It was a pure academic challenge. They did do certain things to, you know, prevent that thing from being withdrawn. The threat level is very different, right? For example, where in Zcash you knew that this was going to be created for cryptocurrency and therefore much, much higher incentives to try to backdoor that ceremony versus like a pure academic challenge, because if you backdoor it, then what’s the point of the challenge, right? So we took that.

The cryptographic library that we used actually wasn’t very mature. I mean, Poramin is just like too excited to implement it. It actually had warnings on it not to use it as is. So we silly used it. And actually, you know, the Zerocoin paper is actually written by some of the top cryptographers in the area, like Ian Mears, Matthew Green, who are very, very respected cryptographers, who also were the founding scientists in Zcash. We kind of respected them, you know, I think they were still very good cryptographers, but we did not challenge the paper as we probably should have with the rigor. And that paper didn’t have security proofs, it wasn’t really described as well. So yeah, we made some mistakes there.

So you know, this was just like a brief, like showing what the RSA factoring challenge, how they actually destroyed the trusted setup. But yeah it’s not so relevant.

So yeah we actually have had suffered three attacks on Zerocoin. Some of them which I think can be blamed solely on us, you know especially when you had only one person which was in retrospect obviously a very bad idea. I think there was an early implementation flaw we missed the equal signs and coins were printed out of thin air so that wasn’t good. It was like in December which was just a couple of months after launch. That was also on the market. So it’s already reflected in our supply.

And the second one was we actually after that we realized that our cryptographic library probably should be looked at by more experts. And we actually engaged cryptographers to look into it and to try to see if there are any sort of issues with the Zerocoin library itself. So the guy that we engaged is called Tim Ruffing. I believe he works with Blockstream now. And he actually found a vulnerability that allowed people to actually intercept your transaction and make it unspendable. So it’s not really like stealing funds or stuff like that, but it was still very annoying, like if like I wanted to burn people’s coins. So that’s why that paper is actually called “Burning Zerocoins for Fun and Profit”.

The last one, which I think was in 2019, which was a really, really bad cryptographic flaw, which was overlooked by everyone. The Zerocoin paper would have been out by 2014 by then, and everyone assumed that it was fine, right? We even engaged cryptographers to look at the protocol, to look at the proof, but this was totally missed out. And kind of an anonymous hacker actually managed to find a cryptographic flaw in the Zerocoin design. And this was a really tough time back then. Zerocoin was actually used by quite a lot of projects, PIVX, Veil and there were a whole lot of PIVX forks as well. So it was one of maybe the third most used privacy protocol then. And we discovered it because we were attacked first, and we had lots and lots of issues with doing responsible disclosure. And actually that kind of backfired when one of the parties that we disclosed to actually disclosed it early resulting in a lot of headaches for other projects as well.

So just to show you that Zerocoin was, I guess, for its time, really innovative, and actually we had built upon it and improved on the ideas upon it, but this was kind of like the first starting base. And yeah, some more problems. Which is also why we rebranded away from Zcoin.

So we actually realized that, hey, first of all, we really didn’t want a trusted setup, right? Even when we launched a Zcoin in and knew of a trusted setup problem in Zerocoin, and we really, really wanted to remove this requirement of trusted setup. You know, it would have been like, you know, a major, major improvement. And we actually came across a paper called “One of Many Proofs” by Groth and Booter. So there’s some people actually call it Groother proofs. And this allowed you to actually prove membership in a way that was quite efficient. And basically with Sigma, which is our new privacy protocol, we actually replaced the Zerocoin, that required the trusted setup, almost kind of like a drop-in replacement with this new one-out-of-many-proof systems, which basically. So you get Zerocoin, but without trusted setup, but with all the other associated issues.

Fortunately, when the Zerocoin flaw happened, we were actually already about to launch Sigma. So although the Zerocoin protocol was actually like a compromise, I think within three months we managed to launch Sigma, which was what we were already aiming for all this while, which kind of also made us not pay so much attention to Zerocoin. But very unfortunate that it happened, a couple of months before we had transition out of Zerocoin. So yeah, it doesn’t suffer the same kind of vulnerabilities with Zerocoin. And one of the big benefits of Sigma is that actually the proof sizes drop from 25 kilobytes to about 2-3, 1-2 kilobytes or so. So it was a huge improvement then.

So, I did run through this before. Basically, you know, Sigma pros and cons — no trusted setup, much smaller proofs, still retains the same amount of auditability as Zerocoin, but they are still some drawbacks, right? The anonymity set goes up to about like 60,000. Of course, an arbitrary number, but basically, unlike in Zerocoin, where no matter how many stuff you put in, the verification time stays the same. For one-of-many proofs, the verification time rises linearly as you put more commitments in. So if there’s like 60,000 commitments and 120,000 commitments, the 120,000 commitments will take two times as long. But with Sigma, the size of the transaction would only increase logarithmically with the size of the membership also. So again, amounts to expose, it’s basically Zerocoin without trusted setup and smaller proof sizes. And this was deployed in July 2019 or so.

And this is, I guess, just to illustrate the problem with kind of fixed denominations, right? Like, it’s actually really inefficient and it also reveals a lot of patterns, right? Because when you don’t hide amounts, even if you have this burn and redeem mechanism using ZKP, if you burn like 1,437.5 and then redeem 1,437.5, no matter what your zero-knowledge proof says, it’s very clear to correlate the two, which is why in all of these systems that do not hide amounts, you kind of have to break them into fixed denominations of 0.1, 10, 5 or so to kind of like hide in this crowd of pools, right?

That also means that you have a lot of proofs that you need to generate. So instead of generating a single proof for 1,437.5, you have to break it down like, let’s say you have some fixed denominations, just like 1000, four 100s, three 10s, it’s like, you know, eight or nine proofs just for a single transaction and that was like horribly inefficient no matter how good your ZKP is. So it is a real problem with fixed denominations and even if you do fix denominations, if you do like a burn, there is a pattern, because you’re breaking down your denominations into certain fixed amounts. If you’re not careful, you know, and you unsheathe you know those patterns can still emerge. So it’s actually a big metadata leak. So fix denominations is bad, right. So I know there are some projects that actually don’t want to hide the amounts like CCX and stuff like that. But in return for supply audibility you have all these issues.

So we look back into the problem and we’re like, man, you know, Signal isn’t really cutting it, you know, fixed denomination suck. And we really, really want to, we really, really want to kind of like, you know, have a more flexible system, right? And basically we took our kind of inspiration from one-of-many proofs and used it to build a totally new protocol called the Lelantus. And actually when we first started this work, we were thinking of using ZKPs, using Bulletproofs and stuff like that. We were actually recommended by some Zcash people to say: “Hey, if you really don’t like trusted setup, why don’t you take a look at this Bulletproof in a way to do zero knowledge?” And we tried for a bit and I think after a couple of months, we realized that verification time due to the inefficiencies, it was like taking several seconds to verify a single Bulletproof to get the kind of similar anonymity sets.

And I believe there was another project that was headed by Dmitry Khovratovich, I think, Dusk. And they also tried to reduce the time of Bulletproofs in this kind of era. And well, they did optimize it a bit, but it was still two or three, four seconds or so, which is obviously very unusable as a transaction currency if you’re gonna get like you know thousands of transactions every time.

So the idea actually is that when we realized that we were actually really excited and we were like: “Oh man, we are kind of screwed, like we don’t really have a way to transition to something new”. But Aram was like: “Hey, you know, why don’t we take a look back at what we did with one-out-of-many proofs and see how we can come up with a way that we can burn and redeem coins without using fixed denomination. So that means it’s like partial hidden amounts. So now, instead of breaking it down, I can do 1,433.5, burn it, and I can redeem partial amounts now. So previously, you could, like with Zerocoin, you had a burn 10, redeem 10, burn five, redeem five. Here, you could redeem partial amounts, and those amounts were hidden. So this, Lelantus work, I can’t really remember the exact date, but we already, I think, were working on it when we launched Sigma and I think what we live on January 2021.

So this actually, you know, the Lantus transect, at least the Lantus like approach using one-of-many proofs. I think I can kind of led to more interest in the area, you know, back then everyone was just using, you know, ring signatures or RingCT and you know, zk-SNARKs type of constructions. And I think Sarrang and a couple of other researchers also were building constructions using one-of-many proofs such as Triptych and Arcturus, which Triptych was the, I guess, the previous number one candidate for Monero scaling, which has now been replaced with Seraphis.

So yeah, what’s the Lelantus pros and cons? Obviously, it removes the need for fixed denominations, still no trusted setup, still basic and discrete log assumptions. And one of the things that was really nice about it, it was pretty efficient because value and membership were actually kind of grouped up into one commitment. And still, because we’re still using the one-of-many proof, membership proof, the anonymity set was still kind of like restricted by like 60,000 before like verification time became too long.

But one of the issues that we were trying to solve was like Lelantus because of the grouping of the way the commitments work, it was very hard to actually do security proofs for it. We had security proofs for portions of it. And what a security proof is basically like math to prove that your stuff is secure. It does what it says. And to actually formalize it is a lot of work, which is why Seraphis for now still doesn’t have security proofs. It’s a very, very hard work. And although like intuitively, maybe practically might be secure, you know, being like going through so many issues in the past kind of made us scared. And we’re like, you know, we really, really should try to get the good security proofs if we can.

And the other issue is that there was no way or there was no kind of stealth addressing system. There was a way to kind of the right to redeem to someone else. So it was almost shielded transactions, but it also meant that people would have to kind of give new shielded addresses every time. And we really, really wanted to avoid that. We wanted kind of like a fully holistic system kind of similar to what Monero has. And yeah, and also we didn’t have a multisig design. I think that was also why Triptych also probably didn’t take off as much as it should.

So yeah, you know, after coming like full circle, you know, we finally came out with Lulantus Spark and Aram back then was looking at like, you know, the constructions in Triptych. He wasn’t that familiar with RingCT, but he saw the way that Sarang built Triptych where the value and the memberships were separate into separate commitments. And he said: “Look, you know, if we separate it like this, it’s a lot easier to build kind of a stealth addressing system”. And I think he thought about it for a couple of months, and he came up with this idea to, oh, it’s like a “linking tx construction” if I’m not mistaken. And that actually allowed us to have this kind of full holistic transaction privacy protocol, because now we fully hide sender, receiver, amounts, and we had also really, really good multisig as well, which I think is like using a Frost implementation that would also hide the fact that it was multisig, and I think Luke also contributed to a library on that.

And I think one of the benefits of Spark and Seraphis is because of its modular constructions. And what that means is that all the individual components are kind of like semi-independent. And what that means that we find a new membership proof, we can replace it with something better, which is something we already actively looking into get global anonymity sets, and also in make security analysis so much easier because you can just into sort of investigate each component kind of individually. So this is where we are at we are actually on. Almost going to be launching test that maybe in one or two weeks. So that’s really exciting and this probably will be the biggest upgrade that we have since then. So Lelantus Spark, you know, we’ve you know went through the cryptographic audit, means the paper has been audited with all the security proofs. We’ve also done a cryptographic library audits. So we actually quite far on and we hope to release this maybe in Q3 this year as in on mainnet. So really exciting and yeah.

So, you know, what’s the spark pros and cons? I think we are quite clear to where we want to be. We have all this complete privacy, still high anonymity sets, that’s still very basic, well, relatively basic, cryptographic assumptions and constructions. And the flexible addressing is really, really good. Like you have full incoming, outgoing, and you can also like offload, because like this ZKPs take quite a lot of computational power, but you can offload that to your computer or mobile device, you’re keeping spend authority in like a low power way wallet address. So that’s really good. And yeah, security analysis and proofs much easier. But again one of the weaknesses is we still don’t have that global anonymity  sets that Zcash as construction has. But we are working towards it, similar kind of approaches that Monero is looking at as well.

This was a work of Sarang. We were actually looking, you know, because like we were thinking as Firo, you know, yes, Monero is like great as currency. Do we really want to be, you know, head on against like Monero and competing in that? Of course, we believe in diversity and freedom. But at the same time, we like thinking like: “Hey, you know, maybe we should also be looking at ourselves as supporting confidential assets, which is also similar to what Zano is building with quite a bit of differences. But the idea is that we’re using Spark technology and extending it to Spark assets. That means anyone can create their own asset and enjoy the same privacy as the Lelantus Spark.

And one of the beauties is that, you know, because we as a smaller project doesn’t have the same transaction volume as Monero, but if we have a asset ecosystem that is quite vibrant, what it means that every, the asset type is also hidden. So that means with every transaction, with every token that is created on this Spark asset layer, whether it’s a USD Coin or a Dock coin or whatever, it contributes to the anonymity set of everyone else, including Firo, so a Firo transactions. So even if you do a Dock coin with only like a hundred people, the anonymity set that you gain is actually greater because you’re sharing the anonymity set with every other asset including Firo on this thing. So we think it’s a great idea and we have some people that are not connected to us that are building bridges to up with the idea to kind of like bridge USDC or other stuff into like our Spark asset layer, use it privately and you can bridge out anything. So we kind of see ourselves as this kind of like privacy layer for that’s cheap and like you know you’re not having compromises there.

So yeah, what’s the future for Spark? Obviously, one of the things like the holy grail that we’re trying to achieve is global anonymity sets, right? And that would actually allow efficient verification times regardless of how many commitments or people are using it, so that’s great. And we actually received quite a big donation from Arcadia who gave us like a 200K grant via Magic Grants, you know, as a 501(c)(3). And we are using part of that money to further research in the curve tree research area, which I believe maybe Monero is also looking at. So maybe there’s some ways that we can collaborate in that area.

So yeah, there’s a lot of lessons learned. I mean, some of them in retrospect are very, very obvious. Sometimes I wish I came from a more math background and my founder kind of knew more. And I guess launching Zerocoin, Zcoin with a two-person team of only one coder was in retrospect very naive, of course. It’s easy to say that now, but back then we didn’t really know, and as a result suffered for it. And one of the other things is that, I know Zcash has got a lot of the Spark disclosure. But when we were trying to deal with our own disclosure and trying to save all these other projects that were using Zerocoin, we kind of naively assumed that everyone would play along and be nice, and got burned quite badly for that. One of the projects actually use it as a marketing style: “Oh, we found it first and then they disclosed it” and then all of that, even though we had disclosed it to them.

And I think from now on if we’re going to be making any sort of disclosure especially with the other projects we’re going to get them to sign agreements at least and try to lock them down. Because we, if we discover the bug I think, we should be able to control the flow of information going out. Obviously responsible disclosure, at the end of the day, it has to be fully transparent. While there is an ongoing threat, there is a certain amount of information withholding that you have to do.

Another thing is that a lot of this stuff, like the audits. A lot of people say: “Oh, audits, we’ve done. We got an audit from Trail of Bits for our Lelantus protocol and still had a bad flaw in it”. So audits are not guarantees. I would say it’s like insurance, but there’s no good replacement for doing your proper security proofs, getting open source and a large community looking in and having several researchers looking at it. Because even you have one really brilliant researcher, they’re going to be biased looking at something they have developed. So that’s really hard. So just don’t just blindly trust your audits, right? And obviously you know security proofs, you know, if we had bothered to try and build security proofs for Zerocoin, maybe we would have caught this problem a lot earlier, and I’m pretty sure that Seraphis will be also going down that route before deployment getting all the security proofs up or so, which is also why we spend so much time trying to do Spark and stuff like that.

And one of the great benefits is that, because now Seraphis and Spark have certain shared elements and ideas, we have benefited from, I think, two disclosures. One from Nicholas, God, I don’t know how to pronounce his Crassus or something, something, sorry. I’m British, Crassus Houts. Well, you know who he is. And the other guy was Luke Parker, kayabaNerve, who also disclosed another vulnerability. So. Although we’re now kind of slightly diverging, the constructions are changing now, but there’s still some shared elements that we can collaborative work on and benefit from joint disclosures.

So one of the other things that we learned is that we were always looking to other projects for inspiration and sometimes Monero also was like the gold standard for privacy and decentralization. But we also have to realize as a smaller coin in a different life cycle, if we were trying to emulate Monero completely, it will completely wreck and destroy us, right, which I guess I’ll talk on the next slide.

So yeah, these were some of the challenges that we faced as a project, you know, our co-founder ran away with all our seed money, I think like one month after launch. We had also a malicious seed investor that basically wanted to turn us into a Ponzi scheme, but then when we refused as the community, you know, we were rage-dumped upon. And I think that’s kind of testament to the pros and cons of getting funding from people, right? We also were very, very big proponents of proof of work. And we spent way too much time trying to get an egalitarian proof of work protocol. So we even came out of our own proof of work algorithm called MTP. We should have been just focusing on privacy.

And then we later moved to Propal. But we still got 51% attack, and our miners, I think Monero is lucky that maybe the miners are aligned, but most GPU miners are unfortunately mercenary, right? Things also something that Oxen also faced as well. And many other smaller coins, even though they may not want to admit it publicly, if we were just purely proof of work, we will just get rigged no matter how much the subsidy is. So I believe proof of work has its place, you know, having like a permissionless way to get coins and stuff like that. But I feel that miners today, especially the GPU miners, are much less concerned with the project, but more on the dollar value that they’ll be getting. And if you realize that, then it’s like, is this a community that you want in our project, right?

So you know, we’ve tried to reach out to them, you know, one of like we are hybrid proof-of-work, proof of a hybrid masternode and proof-of-work consensus, and 90%, 80% of the hash rate is on two miners and you know, we tried so hard to even tell that could you up your fees a bit and whatnot, and they refused, and we even used some of our funds to actually subsidize miners who to mine on other pools. It was like a 10-15% bonus and miners still refuse to switch mainly because they were lazy and not keeping track of the project, right? So yeah, I know a lot of people here are pure proof of work advocates. But as a smaller project there are realities that we cannot replicate with thing. And I feel that this may sound bad but being focused on CPU mining for Monero works, because a lot of these people run botnets, and botnets also run ransomware, and ransomware people like Monero, so there’s like a natural symbiosis, right? So, like the miners are also incentivized to work in the best interest of Monero. So I think that’s interesting, maybe a bit, I guess, controversial, but that’s my take.

So yeah, the other thing is like, you know, the idea of dev tax, the idea of like a premine and stuff like that. For a project of our size, I know we’re like only like twenty five million market cap, although we’re listed on like major exchanges like Binance, Walbi and all of that, it’s really tough to compete in this environment. Monero existed in the vacuum of good altcoins or good privacy coins. And a lot of the exchanges were then grandfathered in and had the adoption. So I think Monero has a lot of advantages there. So if we were to kind of start like no dev tax, no other thing, we would not be able to put out the amount of good work that we have today. And obviously we realize there’s a centralization risk. That’s why we created community funds that are not run by the core team. And we’ve also actually now like we are kind of like 50 percent funded by donations and 50 percent based off our dev reward. So yeah, I mean, we don’t get a lot of money. We get about like 16,000 Firo a month, which right now is like 30 plus thousand and we like subsidized by donations and stuff like that. So if you realize you have developers, cryptographers and putting out all this great work, it’s not cheap. Yeah.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._

_**Reuben:**_ I just very quickly to touch on some other cool stuff that we did. We’ve also built out, not built out, we created this privacy preserving voting protocol that was actually inspired by our work with Spark. And it allows people to vote anonymously, but still verify that it’s been counted, it’s been tallied, it’s been also correctly counted and not modified, while also requiring very minimal trust requirements with the election organizers. So the election organizers can’t like collude and stuff like that. So that’s at the paper stage. We’re trying to get funding to see we can build something out. And the other thing that was really cool was because Paramin actually, prior to joining Zcoin, he was actually serving in the Thai Cyber Warfare Army Unit. And because of his connections, the Thai Democrat Party actually ran its primary elections on our blockchain because the stakeholders then all didn’t trust each other. They wanted e-voting but they thought blockchain would solve the issue and about 127,000 votes were cast. So yeah. Great.

_**Moderator:**_ Thank you Ruben. So yeah, we’re at time, so we’ll do some questions before the next presentation. You covered a couple things that Firo was focusing on that you said, private transactions of course, is that your main goal?

_**Reuben:**_ Yeah, private transactions, private assets, I would say.

_**Moderator:**_ Okay, private transactions, private assets. You have voting on the blockchain.

_**Reuben:**_ Yeah, voting on the blockchain will be a separate thing, but we did do it. But I don’t think that’s our focus here.

_**Moderator:**_ Okay, so just a lot of things going on. What would you say is your mission statement? What is Firo trying to achieve?

_**Reuben:**_ I personally actually want Firo to be kind of like the privacy infrastructure for cryptocurrencies, where anyone can bridge and just live in the Spark asset layer and do everything private. If they want to go back to their original chain, they can always bridge out. Well, of course, originally, I see Firo, of course, I still see it as a currency, but it is a competitive environment. But deep down inside, I really hope that Firo takes off as a currency, and there are quite cool ways to spend Firo today. Like I paid for my trip here using Firo, so great.

_**Moderator:**_ So would you say that there are different projects that do, for example, private transactions better than Firo. They do NFTs better than Firo. Would that be accurate?

_**Reuben:**_ Better than Firo?

_**Moderator:**_ Sure, yes. Like individual projects that focus on a certain property like Firo.

_**Reuben:**_ Yes, so we would also support NFTs on Spark assets and stuff like that, but the idea is that we’re complementing the system rather than saying: “Oh, we’re gonna replace Bitcoin, we’re gonna replace Monero”, right? We see ourselves as this infrastructure layer where people can transfer privacy without having to worry all the technicalities. Obviously, they ask issues with bridging and stuff like that, but we’re working on it.

_**Moderator:**_ Can you talk a bit about the design choices of Firo, for example, opt-in versus default privacy?

_**Reuben:**_ Sure.

_**Moderator:**_ You mentioned the dev tax or the, yeah, you do have a dev tax. You don’t have a pre-mine. Yes, no. Just talk a bit about that.

_**Reuben:**_ Sure. The first question was why you chose... ok. So I am very big on privacy by default, but when we started Zerocoin was designed to work with transparent addresses. So there was no way for us to go like, oh, Zerocoin by default, it just wasn’t really easy to do it that way. And also the technology and the performance characteristics were just not good enough. Obviously I think once we have Spark and kind of like a Spark address, like stealth addressing system, then we can move towards a full default on mandatory privacy. But currently our focus is to have all our official wallets, everything to be focused on Spark addresses, right? That means, you know, we kind of abstract away the transparent layer, but then, you know, for exchanges, they can keep their transparent layer, but we’re trying to convince a few of them to allow withdrawals to Spark addresses and whatnot.

Eventually, if I could do whatever I want without caring about the repercussions, obviously I would say like, yeah, just move Spark addresses mandatory, take that shit. But realistically, I would think that probably a lot of exchanges might delist this, and no matter how good your intentions are, that’s the end of the project, right? Like, yeah, okay, now I can’t do anything at all. So we are trying to adopt a phased approach and hopefully we will get there but hopefully with stuff like Spark assets and stuff like that that anonymity set will be growing a lot higher.

_**Moderator:**_ What’s the daily transaction rate for Firo?

_**Reuben:**_ Only like a couple of thousand transactions a day. So no way near Monero, but yeah.

_**Moderator:**_ So when you mentioned the anonymity set that you’re going to achieve with Lelantus, I think I saw 30 to 60 thousand…

_**Reuben:**_ …65 thousand

_**Moderator:**_ Yeah 65 thousand. So you obviously need many more users than that to actually make use of that anonymity.

_**Reuben:**_ Correct, I mean, obviously we can build whatever we want theoretically and get all of that, right? And the idea as just focusing as a financial currency thing obviously, Monero already occupies that role, which is why we are moving towards assets to hope to kind of get that additional anonymity. I mean, like even right now with Lelantus, although we don’t have that many users, like maybe a couple of thousand or so, we’ve already hit anonymity sets of like 120 over thousand, because we’re sliding, I don’t wanna go into that, but basically we have had quite a lot of transaction volume to fill those sets already.

_**Moderator:**_ So the technical aspect of it, the anonymity set is interesting academically, but from a practical standpoint, what it sounds to me like for a smaller, privacy project, the main focus is getting more users.

_**Reuben:**_ Correct, yes.

_**Moderator:**_ So how do you plan to approach that?

_**Reuben:**_ So I mean, that was why we’re approaching the asset layer to allow people to bring if you can use us as that. So like, you know, looking like, I know more Dinners and all the Dinners are overly like controversial, right? But if we design it like this is actually meant for it and we design it in a way that will not compromise privacy for the rest. You know, we hoping that like, you know, one of the things that we forget about crypto, especially as privacy coins is that we are tinhead for “government’s gonna get us” and all of that. Sure, I get that. But we also realize it’s fun, right? So I’m not against NFTs, especially if it doesn’t compromise the privacy, and hope to be able to bridge. So we have this like little game to kind of like bridge like NFT, but I won’t call them meeting is always a multi-pronged approach, but it’s very centered around the idea that people would want to create assets or would want to create like a voting thing on Spark assets as well. And that would increase the anonymity set and that kind of like virtuous loop, right? To get more people using it. Not necessarily as a currency, but everything else.

_**Moderator:**_ Great, I hope the NFTs work out. So final question before I open it up to the audience. Firo has master notes. How do master notes fit with your mission?

_**Reuben:**_ So back then, when we implemented master nodes in 2017, you also realized that what was available then, so there’s the PC version and the not-so-PC versions. I’m going to just share both. Actually, the founder, Poramin, wanted to remain pure proof of work. And this is spot, because the investor that came in, because remember, our seed money was kind of decimated, right? And back then, you know, master nodes were the hot thing. And yeah, so that was why it was implemented then, right? So now it actually plays a very important role in our security because now obviously our hash rate isn’t… we have been 51% attacked before, but the master nodes play a role in kind of, they will sign the block to prevent any reorg after that. So it’s kind of like master node security. If the master nodes somehow get compromised or get taken offline, then Nakamoto consensus takes over. So that has allowed us to kind of get like, single block finality and stuff like that. But I don’t see master nodes as the way to go forever. I personally don’t like the requirement of a certain fixed collateral. I don’t like the requirement that it be, have to host a VPS somewhere with a fixed IP address and we are looking at other consensus mechanisms. But I think it would be unlikely to go to pure proof of work just because we had so much experience dealing with this as a project of our size. And I think that whatever it is, I would like to always retain some proof of work algorithm to retain that permission less thing, but I don’t think it would survive on its own.

_**Moderator:**_ So you have a plan for erasing out masternodes?

_**Reuben:**_ Yes, so we have a plan of, because we are looking at the serverless, you know, type of stuff, but it’s still early on because we are small and we’re like, let’s fix privacy first.

_**Moderator:**_ Thank you very much. Any other questions from the audience?

_**Question:**_ Thank you for interesting speech. It’s really interesting to see the challenges that you have. I really feel your pain being there. So my question is about confidential assets. This is really challenging technology, and I’m curious how you see the future of this technology, because it’s opened, definitely it opens new chapter in the privacy chains, and how you see the future? Are you planning to implement something like a virtual machine or something like a DeFi tools or how you see this? Thank you.

_**Reuben:**_ I think that’s a hard question, especially, you know, when you’re talking about EVM compatibility and all of that. I know like Beam has done something. I haven’t dived into the details of that, but I would caution especially as we are privacy coins and all of that, doing stuff… private DeFi may not be what you want because then when you get rubbed, you don’t really know what you’re getting rubbed, right? So I feel that there’s all this talk about private DeFi and of course I applaud efforts to go down that route, but I don’t think Firo wants to go fully down that like full programmability route. I think if anything, we are looking at ways to make it easier to, you know, we may have some additional scripting abilities that will make it easier for other stuff to bridge over, because we want that process as seamless as possible, but I would have to admit that’s still a work in progress. But if you talk about… my opinion of DeFi is that it is really important, but there are only very few things that are really valuable. And one of it, which is EVMs, which are great, and the other one are landing protocols. Everything else, yeah, maybe, but these are the two major building components that I think are important. Maybe I’m uneducated in things, but this is what I see. And I’m trying to see that if I can reduce that attack surface, then great, but it’s still a work in progress.

_**Moderator:**_ Any other questions? Thank you, Ruben.

_**Reuben:**_ Thank you
