# Juraj Bednar

_**How Privacy Electronic Cash & Cypherpunk Tech Increases Our Freedom?**_

[https://youtu.be/ONF0416QxHg](https://youtu.be/ONF0416QxHg)

---

_**Doug:**_ Next up is Juraj Bednar. He’s gonna talk about, I guess, why digital cash and the cypherpunk movement will bring us more freedom. Cheers, man!

_**Juraj:**_ Thank you. I’m really excited to be here. I feel that the Monero events are very much closer to the original cypherpunk ethos of the first Bitcoin conferences. So there’s not many people who are wearing suits and talk about VC money and stuff. It’s all about the freedom and privacy and all these values that we all share.

So my talk is about trying to answer this question. Okay, so we have this software, we have encryption, anonymity software, zero knowledge proofs, digital money — how does this actually improve our freedom in real life?

So of course I’m a geek, I like to play with all the software. I was one of the first users of PGP when it came out. And this was just exciting just to see — ok, it works. But the question is usually: okay, so how can I apply this to my life to increase my liberty? And it turns out that the question is actually the other way around. So the first cypherpunks were trying to increase their liberty and they were looking for technologies to do that and describe them.

So how to go about it? So first we need to know what we are optimizing. So what is freedom? What is liberty? Libertarians would like to refer to something that is called a “Non Aggression Principle”, which means some kind of absence of coercive force allowing individuals to live their lives freely and do whatever they want without interference. This definition is nice, but the bad keyword here is “they”. They want to coerce you, and you don’t like it. So philosophically, it’s okay. Practically, it is not wise to rely on some abstract “them” if you are talking about your own liberty. You don’t want to wait until they change, until they stop applying this force to you.

So all these libertarian talks, anarcho-capitalism, reform effort, talking on the forums, Twitter pissing contests, protests, manifestos — they’re nice, okay, have fun. But they are not increasing your freedom today. So you are not looking to win an argument, you are looking for ways to increase your liberty. So you are looking for something to do. So we need to look at some other ways how to optimize this. We need some KPI. So let’s try to understand the game.

So current society, especially the part of the day, is based on dominance hierarchies. These hierarchies are the game, you know, you’re either up or down, you are trying to step up or you’re trying to not stand out. We need to understand this game, but this is actually the wrong way to look at it, because most people would try to figure out: okay, so what is the person on top of the hierarchy doing? Do they want to kill me? Do they want to surveil me? Force tax me? Do they want to whatever?

So if it relies on understanding some grand plan of some abstract people that we don’t even know about, that’s a wrong point of reference because you will almost certainly get it wrong. And even if we can figure out their intentions, they might not succeed in their goals. So if someone writes a book called “The Great Reset” and they unveil their great master plan for society, they might not succeed.

So if you want to increase your liberty today, you need to look at it from the point of view of this guy. Basically, being in this kind of hierarchy means that the nodes, top nodes, they want to show you your place, they want you to ask their permission, and they are applying this coercive force.

So, how do you play this game if you are not the top node, which is what we all are? Maybe there are no top nodes. So, you can either be something that is called the “beta”. So the aim of the beta in this game is they don’t want to stand out. They are not aspiring in moving up this hierarchy. So basically they do about whatever they do. They go to office every day like this guy on the picture. They have a mortgage, they have politically correct opinions and they don’t want to be seen, so this force is not applied to them. I don’t recommend playing this game in this role.

Another one is this guy, it’s the “alpha”. The goal of the alpha is to move up in the hierarchy, which is, I don’t think, a good strategy either, because first of all, maybe you think you are moving up but it is very easy to get kicked out of the game. And the hierarchy itself, it’s unknowable. We maybe feel who is above us in the hierarchy, but we might get it wrong because it’s a complex system, and the drawing is very nice, but in reality, complex systems are very hard to predict. So another thing is that going up will not actually make you happy. It rewards the more primate parts of our brain. So it doesn’t work anymore like snorting a line of cocaine would actually make you the king of the world. It would definitely make you think you’re one, but that’s not what happens in reality.

Before we go to the third strategy, which is actually the good one, there’s this one trap that is called “we can make the game better” trap. The hierarchies are basically watered down. There’s no someone with a whip telling you what to do every day. Usually there are no bosses yelling at you. You are given an office with beanbags and mango kombucha in the fridge, and, you know, it’s all chilled. And this means that it is easy for us to go to fall for this trap, which is: okay, it’s not so bad, and maybe we can work on making it a little bit better. You know, maybe we need whatever, a ping pong table in the office, and maybe if we vote correctly, then something will change. If we are making it a little bit better, we are not winning the game. So let’s ask about how to win the game and it will tie back to the technologies pretty soon.

So in my opinion, winning the game is leaving the game, which brings much more fulfillment and that’s where the technologies can help us. So when you move from this hierarchical to this, which I got it from Paul Rosenberg, he calls it “node-first approach”, you are actually creating something much nicer. You have these nodes that are interacting. These nodes are different and these interactions are much more colorful, let’s say, and much more fulfilling, I think. So by leaving the game you avoid trying to place yourself or find your place in the hierarchy. So what do you need to do? And that’s where the technologies help us.

First of all, you need to become something that we call “gamma”. So you’re not alpha, you’re not trying to dominate others. But you are also not submissive, you’re not trying to just do what other people tell you to do.

It’s a good idea to drop off the radar of the hierarchy. For example, in the hierarchy, someone can tell you if you can get a mortgage or bank account, if you want to drop off this part of the hierarchy, you basically need to opt out from the banking system, for example.

It’s a good idea to not try to threaten the hierarchy itself. So becoming a little bit invisible, doing your own thing and just making sure you’re not participating in this type of dominance-based interactions is a better idea.

And then, once you successfully step out, another thing is that you need to create, nurture, and grow meaningful relationships with these other nodes. And that’s something that we are, I think, not doing enough. And we should work on this part because we set up our software stack and everything, but then we don’t use it really.

So, in the first part, I defined freedom or liberty negatively. So something that other people should not do to us. But I think it’s a good idea to look at a positive definition from the individual viewpoint. So I’m not talking about universal rights for healthcare or something. But when you step out, you kind of lose this feedback. You don’t know your place. You don’t know where you stand in the hierarchy. So you need to discover yourself, you need to find out what you are going to actually do when you are really free and you are really out. So this is something I call “freedom to”, so freedom to do something, not freedom from coercion, but freedom to whatever is your thing that you want to do. You need to replace the place in the hierarchy with some other kind of feedback mechanism. I think a really good one is called “profit”, which is why the current establishment doesn’t like these words, because it provides you a feedback that is different than the place they show you in the hierarchy.

So what is interesting is that when you look at this node network, it has much more possibilities. You’re not only a place in some kind of tree. Of course, there are more hierarchies than one. But with these connections, you can have different connections with different people. So you have a lot of possibilities. And this is scary because you really need to discover yourself. It’s not something that someone will tell you: “Okay, you are a software developer? Okay, so you need to wake up, come at 9 a.m. to the office, and then we’ll deduct your taxes, and at 5 p.m. you can go home”, and blah, blah, blah. But you need to figure out how to do this, okay? Who is going to pay for my work? When I want to work, actually, and so on. So these possibilities are different, or expanded, but this is scary for many people, if they actually do it.

One of the other forms of freedom that I like, and it is also a category “freedom to”, is optionality. So that’s something that you can but you don’t have to do.

Okay, so as I said, in the process of leaving the game, you are actually discovering yourself and creating yourself. So you’re building yourself with intention and you’re discovering yourself by facing the fears and seeing what you actually can do, what your capabilities are and so on. I really like this quote: “Don’t aim to be the best, be the only”. So it’s a quote by Kevin Kelly. And “being best” usually means the part in the hierarchy — I’m the best cryptographer, I’m the best software developer. So that means that others are worse. If you are the only, you realize: “Okay, there’s only one person in this world that can do what I can do because I have unique capabilities”. For example, I just wrote some books and I’m 100% sure that I’m the only person in this world that could write this book. There’s no one else. So if I don’t do it, it won’t happen. So I’m not saying I’m the best writer. I’m saying that I’m the best person to create what I actually created.

So how does this tie to cryptoanarchy? So cryptoanarchy is basically a strategy to prevent conflicts not only with the state, but the focus is the state because it’s the most coercive force, by using these modern technologies like cryptography, anonymization, electronic cash and so on, many other technologies.

Most freedom theory is based on the goal of winning conflicts. So either you do a revolution or you lobby the government to change the laws and so on, or you are a successful agorist and you figure out how to go around the state and defund it basically. An example of this would be, for example, drug legalization movement. It’s an effort to convince the government to do something and actually win this conflict. Cryptoanarchy is a strategy that you can use today and it is based on a very different premise. And that’s why I don’t like comparing a freedom philosophy to cryptoanarchy, because cryptoanarchy is a strategy to implement it.

So let’s look at military terminology. In military strategy, there is something called an OODA loop. OODA loop means that if two parties are in conflict, they both sides do this loop. They observe what is happening, then they orient themselves, so they try to figure out what is the meaning. Okay, so for example, I see a Russian tank in the next street, that’s the observation. Then I orient myself, I see: okay, it’s coming my way. And so, you know, it’s a Russian tank, so it’s probably hostile to me. Then I need to decide what to do. And when I decide, I need to do it. So both sides are constantly, if they’re in the conflict, they’re in this loop. If you get out of this loop, it doesn’t continue. So the fastest way to end the conflict is to end it in the first step. It’s not observable what you’re doing, and the conflict doesn’t even begin. So that’s the aim of crypto-anarchy.

To understand how it works, we need to understand that only human bodies can be put into jail. So if you are an anonymous identity and it’s not possible to observe the relationship between your identity and your physical body or it’s not possible to orient, to understand the relationship, then it is very hard to put someone in jail. Of course, there are exceptions, as we have heard during this conference, but this is the idea. So the strategy of using these technologies is, first of all, to drop out of the radar, break this connection between your physical body and what you are doing so that it is not observable. If for some reason it is observable, it should be very difficult for the counterparty to actually understand what happened.
So I’ll give you a concrete example. You want to buy drugs, let’s say whatever, Molly. In Eastern part of Europe, there is a strategy for this that is based on these cryptoanarchist ideas, which is called “drop gangs”. So basically, you order usually through some Telegram bot what you want, in which area of the city you are, you pay some way, either cash to some person or even crypto, and then you will get a description of where you can get your package. So it might be third bench from the left in the park and it’s taped under the bench. So what happens is that it is not possible to intercept this deal because it has already happened. The drugs are already there when the buyer receives the information about their location. So if this was a sting operation, if they tried to catch the drug dealer, there is no interaction with the person, with the physical body of the person, because the package is already taped there. So breaking the observed part, maybe if they can observe part of the transaction, for example, because everyone is using the stupid Telegram, which is not encrypted and so on, then it is very difficult to see what happened and understand it and use it as evidence.

Other ways to, for example, deal with this problem is decriminalization, which other liberty movements do. They try to change the rule which the counterparty in the conflict uses to decide what to do with you and they catch you. But I think it is better to prevent this actually happening.

So this is basically the theory of cryptoanarchy and all these technologies that were mentioned and envisioned in the cryptoanarchist manifesto are implementations of this strategy to make sure that your actions are not tied to your physical body that can be put into jail.

In order to do this successfully, we need to understand the observer thing, what is the capability of the observer. It’s a very interesting historical book about how states pushed for like unique names and surnames and databases of date of birth, addresses and so on. The book is called “Seeing Like a State”. And I like to adapt to this mindset. So you need to understand what the state sees in relation to your actions. So not everything, you don’t need to understand all the surveillance, you just need to know the parts that affect you. So it’s good to understand how reporting works, for example, why state needs addresses, land registries, ID documents, when you actually have to present them when you can legally use a pseudonym, it’s a good idea to use it, and so on.

So historically nomads were people who were mostly free from taxation at least. Of course there were other things that were not so good for nomads, but because they were not tied to land, it was very difficult to actually put them in the database and see who they are and what should they pay their taxes on. So, becoming a nomad, for example, as Pavel was saying yesterday with his global opportunistic framework, is a good idea. And I will explain how the state sees nomads in a while. But just to tell you that with many of your actions, you can actually travel or nomad but not necessarily into a different country. You can nomad to something that we call “cyphersphere”. So encrypted communication, anonymization technologies, and only most digital money like Monero.

All right, so how does the state see these nomads? So basically you want to be seen as an unproductive backpacker that is having the time of their life, spending either their parents’ money, if you are young enough, so living off the parents’ credit card, or you take on some loans, but definitely you should not have any income. You don’t own any real estate. You are basically a person that is moving around the world, not making anything and basically a poor person. It’s good if you are even a homeless. That doesn’t mean that you can’t sleep in a hotel or in a rented apartment, but from the point of view of the state, you are basically one of those, you know, poor backpacker that is walking around the world and exploring. You can actually own property, but it’s good if this property is not in what I call the “fiat world”, which doesn’t mean only bank account balances, but as I said, stock in a government that is accessible to the state, real estate and so on.

So this way, you are building business case for your counterparty, which is the tax office, and this counterparty needs to understand that it will be a lot of effort for them to actually do anything about you, audit you, anything, and when they put in the effort, their payoff is zero. So basically, the counterparty needs to see: “Okay, this is a homeless backpacker that doesn’t own anything, doesn’t have any income, I can try to prove some income, but I will waste a lot of energy and I will not get any money”. If this is the case for the tax office, then you are applying this strategy correctly. You need to understand things that they see actually.

So for example, when you cross borders, of course, they scan your passport, they know in which country you are. There are exceptions, for example in the European Union. You can move around and that has some good implications for us. But there are license plate scanners, there’s face recognition for drivers of cars, and so on. So just be aware of what the other party sees and try to build, I prefer the “homeless backpacker”.

Okay. Now you kind of became this person that is not interesting for any state adversary. Again, I’m not saying you should win a conflict. I’m saying you should put yourself in a position when any conflict is basically a waste of time of your counterparty. So if you do this, the other question is: okay, now what do I do? I’m free. I can, you know, roam around the world with my backpack and my family preferably. So what do you do?

The positive part of what to do is you are creating these node-first relationships. You do not need to go large. I owned several companies in the peak. I employed around 100 people and I realized that when I switched, I sold the companies, I switched to this node-first approach. So I still cooperate with people, but I’m not employing anyone. I’m not anyone’s boss. I just cooperate with people with their unique abilities. What I realized is that my income is almost the same, but with much lower risk. I’m not responsible for feeding 100 families. I’m responsible for myself. And the downside is much lower. So, many people want to, you know, the first question is, if you have a company, if you have a startup, many people would ask you: “How many people do you employ?” And I think the best answer is zero, at least for me. So be too small to fail. And then you show up, you bring value, you interact with people, you communicate with these node, because there are these communication, freedom of expression rights in most countries. And I like to emphasize that financial communication is also communication. We’re basically sending digitally signed “thank you” messages. Which brings me to another point.

My friend, Juraj Karpish, who is an economist of the only true economic school, which is Austrian economy, says that one of the functions of money is it’s a memory of good deeds of society. So it’s like a database: I help someone and I get an entry in the database. I like this. This is a good way to explain why it is a good idea to own some crypto, Bitcoin or Monero or whatever you want, it is basically creating an entry in a backup database. Should anything happen to the old fiat database, like inflation, confiscation, excessive taxation, and all these things, you have an entry that you helped someone also in the backup database. So I think everyone should own at least some crypto.

Another thing that I like to say is what I said a while ago, a moment ago, is that money is also a form of “thank you” card, of gratitude. The project Gratuitas allows you to send more money as a “thank you” note directly to the farmer. So when you pay for something, you are basically giving the money and saying “Thank you for solving my problem”. That’s what it is.

And many people would say: “Okay, I’m hodling my Bitcoin, I’m never paying with it, I’m using Bitcoin because Monero people don’t do this”, which is great. And they would try to use the pretense of Gresham’s law to try to unload their shit coins, their fiat to other person. And I think it is completely backwards, because if we are, if I know, for example, Pavel appreciate receiving Monero as a “thank you” note from me, then I should not dump my shitcoins on him. You know, I know this is his value. He prefers Monero and I want to say “Thank you. You solved my problem. Here’s Monero. Here’s the money that you prefer”. This is how you show appreciation. So I say “Fuck Gresham’s law”. And you know, if you have too much fiat in your wallet, go and buy some nice entry in the memory of good deeds of society, which is a parallel database, and don’t bother other people with your shitcoin problems. So it’s basically, you know, paying with fiat is like barter, you know, you need to get rid of the shitcoin, but you’re waiting until you need to make some purchase, while you can always, you know, buy Monero or Bitcoin or whatever is your favorite coin in the first place. This is how I like to show up and how I like to say “thank you” to people.

Another thing that I don’t like to do is something that here Pieter Levels explained. And I love this guy, by the way, he’s a great builder. He builds projects. He wrote a book about how he launches hugely successful projects several times a year. Mostly by himself, but this is something I disagree with and basically said that the easiest hack to save money is to start your company and put everything into expenses which lowers your tax burden, because you can deduct the expenses. Which like it works you can do it but it’s like paying with fiat. So the problem with this approach is your expense is someone else’s official income, which usually means official taxable income. So if you pay cash or crypto, you don’t ask for a receipt. You can quite often negotiate 20 to 50 percent discount because that’s what the tax cost is. And if you actually talk to people and you tell them that you want to participate in this parallel economy, what I like to use is when they ask me how I want to pay in a cafeteria or somewhere, a restaurant, I say: “I would like to pay with cash and please save the trees, don’t bring to me the receipt”. So I don’t tell them, you know: go off the books. I just say: “I don’t want the receipt, you do whatever you want”. And it saves people money and you don’t have to force them into this compliant reporting. So if you pay with credit card, there is no way for them to avoid going through the official means, but it still can save money if you are in a parallel economy.

So I think the better approach is to solve your tax issues systematically, so not per expense, but if you have a tax problem, then there’s a service that many providers provide, which is called “Solving your tax problems”. Usually they are called tax consultants or offshore consultants or whatever. Of course, many people also participate in parallel economy. So, you know, don’t break any laws, don’t go to jail. But if you prefer these kinds of interactions, then you will be rewarded by at least a good feeling.

So, in summary, the game, what we are trying to do, is not about persuading some random merchant that you want to pay with Monero, that doesn’t help your freedom that much. It’s a good thing to do, I’m not saying you should not do it. Also, I think the game is not about configuring your ultra-paranoid Graphene with Tor and, you know, command line, Monero, multisig, super private setup. I think this is going to get it in the wrong way. You should start with your goal. Okay, this is what I want to do with my life. This is the freedom I need. This is how I want to approach it. And then you look at the technological tools and see: “Okay, I don’t want the state to see this, this, this, because privacy, why should I show and reveal myself to the state? But I am using these tools with a specific purpose. I have a goal and I’m going at it with a goal”. So if there’s something, you know, some people are afraid of whatever showing metadata or you know they don’t want to be in a database scene that they called an Uber. Okay, is it a problem if the state knows you called an Uber? If not, then call an Uber. Don’t bother with Tor and anonymous prepaid cards and SIM cards and stuff. But maybe something else is a problem? Like a payment maybe or something like that?

So the game is really about stepping out of these dominance hierarchies and the more of us that do it the more nodes are available and the richer the interactions become. And that of course increases the value for all of us. So the way to do it, summarize, disappear from the radar. Doesn’t matter if fully or partially or however you want. One strategy is to use cash and crypto, avoid systems of control, do not broadcast your location and so on.

Then understand them just enough to be able to step out of the game. You don’t need to follow all the politicians. I am Paraguayan resident, for example. I have no idea what are the political parties in Paraguay. It doesn’t concern me because when there is some problem for me, then I will just move somewhere else. So I understand it only enough to be able to live my life and I don’t concern myself with other stuff.

Then you can create and shoot, because it’s very fulfilling, create value and meaningful business and personal relationships. In the cyphersphere, interact with people. I know it is easier to go to an exchange, you know, do a wire transfer and buy Monero, then to look in your social network and see if someone is selling and then meet with them and exchange it for cash. Yes, it’s a lot more work, but also you are building this relationship and you have, let’s say, 20 people that you regularly interact, you talk, you maybe learn that they have some unique capability that you need and you interact and you build these nodes.

So I don’t like if it’s your thing, of course, but I don’t recommend wasting time with political discussions, persuading politicians about regulation and these things. And I do not recommend to be overly paranoid about everything. You know, there are some things that are okay to share, and you need to understand what the state sees, basically, and how it relates to your goals.

So some resources. I have an article on my blog, which you can find easily. It’s called “Searching for Gamma”, and it’s basically on how to step out of these hierarchies and become “gamma”. So it’s, I would say, a personality trait. So when you actually meet these gamma people, very different, and if you’re not used to it, it’s quite weird, but I recommend seeking them out and becoming friends with them. They’re pretty nice.

I also wrote a manifesto about freedom as optionality. You can also find it easily. And I published two books recently. One is a short e-book, which is called “Cypherpunk Visions and Trends, 2023 to 2025”. So it explains many technologies that can be used for these purposes. It’s more like a fun read about open source AI and innovations in crypto technologies and so whatever, progressive web apps and so on. And I also wrote this book, which I brought two copies with me. It’s called “Cryptocurrencies — Hack Your Way to a Better Life”. There’s also an ebook. And you can have a look if you want. I will have it unless I pass it to people.

And I have been running on crypto and using these technologies for at least a decade. And we have built even businesses that are running fully on crypto. So many people think it’s impossible because of the volatility. But Paralelni Polis in Prague, Paralelni Polis in Bratislava and some other of our businesses have been using crypto as an asset in the company. So not accepting crypto, but really running on crypto a crazily volatile cryptocurrency or cryptocurrencies, and we found a way how to do it. So I try to teach people that they can actually do it. And especially Monero is very useful to business relationships. Yesterday, Pavel was talking, answering the question about Panama Papers, that it has become more difficult to do offshore business but not because you cannot create an offshore company, but because it is nearly impossible to get a bank account for the offshore company. But if you have a structure with companies in different jurisdictions, and you don’t need a bank account when they can pay each other in Monero, then you don’t have problem, and basically Panama Papers didn’t happen. So very useful also for tax purposes, but that’s for another topic. So I’ll finish here and If we have time for questions, I’m happy to answer questions. Thank you.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._

_**Question:**_ My question, when you speak about making the incentive for the state to expend too much energy to go after you, would you advocate or suggest anything like deliberately doing things that would cause them to use their resources, such serving subpoenas or freedom of information requests that’ll just make them do some work?

_**Juraj:**_ You know, I know it’s fun. You can use AI to generate these letters and interact with them to waste their energy. But my strategy is, you know, the observe orient part, I don’t even want to interact with them. So the strategy is basically be multilayered.

So for example, you can have a tax residency in a country that doesn’t tax income. So that’s the first step. But then another country can maybe claim, okay, maybe you whatever have ties to whatever country issued your passport. So we consider you really a tax resident. Then for you, the next step is to say: “Oh, I am terribly sorry. You’re right. I’m your tax resident. But unfortunately, I don’t have an income. I’m poor. I’m living out of loans. So I personally prefer crypto collateralized loans. So I never sell any crypto. I only use it as a collateral for a loan. So there is no income to declare, so I didn’t even have to file tax returns”. So when they see this, you have these interactions, but at any point they will know what they can get out of you. And probably if they look hard enough, they see that they cannot get anything because you really don’t have income. You are probably a tax resident somewhere else. So that’s the taxation case, but there are of course many other cases.

But the idea is never to rely on one single thing. So that’s the OODA loop strategy is — make sure they cannot observe anything. If they can observe, make sure they cannot understand what is happening, and make sure that it is very difficult for them to harass someone else, maybe some successful entrepreneur with a good car or something like that. But they should see from the first look at you that they will not be getting any tax income from you because you are living a different kind of lifestyle and you are burden to society. So, is there any other question?

_**Question:**_ Where can we buy your books?

_**Juraj:**_ I have two here, they’re on my website, which is hackyourself.io, and they’re also on Amazon, ebook, there’s also a Spanish version, which is only ebook right now, but you can also come here and have a look, I have two to show around. Alright. Another question.

_**Question:**_ So I get your point about not caring about politicians, because it just burns so much energy discussing with other people about what you should be able to do with your life, which to me makes no sense. But I think that… So the question is what technologies or what do you think that needs to happen, for example, for states to compete more fiercely between them. Because, sure. I mean, I live in Argentina and sure I can use Monero and I can deal with the black market and I can get my stuff done. But maybe if I lived somewhere else that wasn’t as adversarial, maybe I’ll have an easier life. So I think it’s still not only important to have technologies to let you up doubt, but also the environments that maybe they can help. So I think crypto is something that forces states to compete more fiercely with each other. But so what do you think about the role of crypto in competition of states and what other technologies are stuff that needs to happen to push more for that?

_**Doug:**_ Good question.

_**Juraj:**_ Thank you for this question. So the crucial thing, so when you step out of this hierarchy, what happens is that you step out of this mindset of that there are rules that I need to comply with. What it means in practice, sometimes when I talk to politicians, which they for some reason want to talk to me in different countries, their mindset is, for example, we are going to regulate it this way and then everyone has to comply. So we are designing the set of rules in such a way that we expect everyone to comply because it’s the law. But if you step out of the hierarchy, you are in a supermarket. You are not going to comply with Argentinian law. You say: “Okay, they passed the law, I don’t like it. What about Paraguay? What about Panama? What they can offer?” So their mindset is top down, creating of law and enforcing them. Your mindset should be — I’m in a supermarket. Here I want to do business. Here I want to get married. Here I want to whatever, own real estate, if that’s your thing. Here I want to smoke weed because they have coffee shops and it’s legal.

So basically this creates the incentive for all the countries to compete on these laws. So Paraguay and Uruguay, their business case is attracting people from tax health such as Argentina and Brazil making shit tons of money because they don’t tax them. Thailand recently legalized weed. They attract everyone who wants to have a nice time on the beach and smoke weed. So, you know, El Salvador, whatever, I’m not a fan of forced tender, and especially if it’s, you know, Bitcoin only, I’m not a maxi. What they did is they clearly said: “Okay, come spend your precious Bitcoin here in our country. It will be tax free, so you will enjoy it more”. And you attract people. So I think that they are already in competition, that we don’t have to do anything to try to force them to compete more. They are already competing.

And basically, if we talk, for example, about taxation, Like there’s this push to have like a minimal tax of 10%. OECD is pushing on a minimal income tax of 10%, which is a cartel agreement. And cartel agreements are very profitable to break. So what countries will do, for example Malta is doing, what Malta is doing is they have like a 35% tax and when you pay it, you get a refund of most of it. So they have 35% tax, but you’ll get it back as a refund right after you pay it. So this competition is very fierce. There are many countries that say that they will not comply with 10% minimum tax. So I don’t think we need to do anything. Honestly, you know, get out of the radar, you know, pick where you’re treated best. And also you don’t need to pick one country for everything. As I said, you can enjoy life here, start a company there and there and there, and so on. So I hope that I answered your question. Any more or? There’s one more.

_**Doug:**_ Is there one more? Okay.

_**Question:**_ Sorry, I arrived a little bit late to the speech. So maybe you already introduced yourself and everything. Are you new to Mexico? Are you like new to here to Mexico? Or you’ve been here before?

_**Juraj:**_ I’ve been here once. Yeah.

_**Question:**_ Okay, what freedoms or what, which opportunities do you see that we have here that we may locals may even aware of like: hey, you have this freedom. Why don’t you use it? What have you seen so far?

_**Juraj:**_ So opportunities for locals. I think doing what you’re good at already is a good idea. So basically as an individual, I’m not saying about what any government should do, but as an individual, basically strategy same, regardless of where you are, find what you’re good at. Be the only one that can do it and then provide these services. I recommend doing it more peer-to-peer, maybe interact more internationally if you have these global currencies such as Monero. Then sell your products, sell your services on the market to individuals, to other nodes, to other people. You don’t need to see corporations or anyone. And I think that’s the best thing that we can do regardless of where we’re from. So I cannot comment on laws or reforms. I don’t know. All right.

_**Doug:**_ All right, give it up for Juraj Bednar. Thank you so much, man. That was amazing.
