# Grafton Clark

_**Vexl**_

[https://youtu.be/s8GdZq2TZ_A](https://youtu.be/s8GdZq2TZ_A)

---

_**Grafton:**_ So it appears I’m live. Hello, my name is Grafton. Today I’m going to be talking about Vexl, which is a project I’ve been working on for the last year or so with some of my excellent colleagues. So yeah, this is me. I’m a project manager at Vexl. I mainly focus on community building. We’re in the Czech Republic, part of the SatoshiLabs kind of the newest companies is the part of them. What I do is I focus on the meetups and trying to build the community to ensure that we’re doing it the right way. We... yeah, let me go to the next slide.

So first I’ll tell you about what is Vexl and what does it aim to solve? So what I see is Vexl is a peer-to-peer application that’s somewhere on the crossroads between a social network and a dating site and things for bitcoiners. But as we were initially aimed at Bitcoin, it was quickly kind of adapted into a market for everyone, for anything. So without our influence. We don’t have much control over the market itself, because it’s completely peer-to-peer and fully encrypted.

So you can kind of see just from the very beginning here, as soon as we launched, there’s offers being posted for Monero, of course, for honey, for English language lessons, but also for things like iPads and what else. Lots of different things.

So where did we launch? We launched specifically in Czech Republic and Slovakia. Our big kind of debut was at a conference here in Czech Republic called ChainCamp, which is the largest non-speaking, I think, non-English speaking Bitcoin conference in the world. It was over 2,000 attendees in Ostrava. Five days later, the marketplace went alive. We built this amazing, had this amazing reaction from the community there. Quickly 4,900 users in the first, like, offers, 2.1 million connections were made, and offers quickly grew to 500 within the first few weeks.

So why did we do this? I’m a bitcoiner. My first actual introduction to Monero was last year in Lisbon at Monerokon, which was kind of a very fun, interesting conference for me. I’ve been a bitcoiner for a long time. I was an English teacher and always used my kind of platform to talk to people about what was going on with Bitcoin and kind of orange peeling people over the years. But last year, I kind of learned a lot about Monero.

But one of the things that I always kind of see it with it is most of the onboarding for Monero starts at centralized exchanges where these exchanges call like they require KYC. So this kind of creates a permanent record of you buying. So as we know the Monero has really excellent privacy features, you still there’s still a record of you buying it.

So how do we fix this? Well, I’m a bitcoiner, so I believe the first line of Satoshi’s paper tells us that it is a peer-to-peer cash system, electronic cash system, and it should be used without a trusted third party, without a financial institution. And that’s why I’m so passionate about Vexl and what we’re doing.

It allows users to maintain their privacy while trading. And one of the things that we think about even with Monero and in exchanges and every kind of situation is that there is a difficult onboarding process. And what we want to do is aim to kind of fix that. So we want to simplify it. We don’t want to, I always have this joke about how, you know, if I buy something like for food, I don’t need a receipt for it, I just want food. Give me the doughnut. You give me, I’ll give you the money in the transaction. And the same thing goes with Bitcoin is I don’t want to upload my passport and my water bill and my ID and everything. I want it to be simple.

And this brings me to kind of an experience I’ve had recently with Vexl and my friend, because I have a very good friend. And every time we tried to get into the conversation of Bitcoin, it was difficult for him. He is an American living in Czech Republic. The onboarding for him was not easy. If he’s going through a centralized exchange, he was always required to jump through some massive hoop or had some sort of problem. And that’s where we realized that you don’t need fancy tech to do things.

Vexl kind of proves that it’s not necessary to reinvent the wheel. We want to focus on user experience, accessibility, and allow people to trade easily and quickly without KYC or any sort of hurdles.

So back to my friend, um, we call it his, his name’s Garry. And I spent a lot of time with Garry. He is a kind of a guy who’s not a tech guy. I used to have the joke that the day he tries to buy Bitcoin is the day I sell kind of thing is, is that’s when it’s jumped the shark as clumsy did. But Gary, over the years, we spent a lot of time talking to each other on PlayStation chat, and as we played games in the evening, and as I started a career in kind of the Bitcoin industry, of course, my focus became more related to privacy and trying to figure out, well, how do we maintain that in a world where everyone’s constantly trying to dox us? We’re providing our data to everyone for everything. And that’s a question.

So as Gary started getting interested, again, he was overwhelmed by the lack of options of how limited it was. He could go to an ATM. Yes, that was probably the easiest thing for him. But then he had to figure out, well, where is ATMs? How much can I buy? And had to drive and locate them. So as we started talking, and I’m working on this app, we kind of gave it a try.

So the story kind of Garry’s a new father, he has a son, but he has a newborn. And as the chaos of that whole, like new child in the life, he was looking for some way to spend time with his kid. And gaming, as I said, something Garry and I did for a long time together, but it’s something he and his son were doing. And he went through and said: “I’m gonna buy my son a Switch”, so that, it’s usually child more and league games. So he tried to buy one on Facebook marketplace and immediately with scam. And so later the evening we’re laughing, I’m talking on chat and, laughing at him saying: “You know, really, you didn’t expect anything. I didn’t expect anything less.” Facebook is this marketplace where you have your name and your picture and all of these things, but yet we know it’s a battleground for scammers.

So I started to think and I have a Nintendo Switch personally that I purchased in 2017 at a Bitcoin all time high and this was kind of a sore spot for me for a while but gave me an idea. So I decided that I would sell my Nintendo Switch, but I would only accept Bitcoin. And so Garry again sighed and rolled his eyes and said again: “I don’t know how to do it.” So I said: “Please download our app and let’s see what we can do, see how easy this is.” So I went back and forth with him on a Lightning wallet us sending sacks back and forth and then once he kind of felt comfortable he posted his ad, and it was amazing for me because he broke me almost immediately and was like: “So people want to sell me Bitcoin.”

And the way that it works is because this is a peer-to-peer platform it uses your social network, your connections. It’s fully anonymous, so you don’t know who the counterparty is, but you are aware that you have mutual connections. The mutual connection that my friend Garry found was not someone connected through me. It was actually through his landlord and through one other person. So he says: “Well, it’s weird because these people, we have some sort of connection here.” So instead of worrying about getting scammed, he was excited about the idea that there were these people, that he was somehow sharing this connection with what was Bitcoin.

So within a couple of messages back and forth, and some confirmations that the counterparty was legitimate and he was trusted, he was able to acquire the Bitcoin via Lightning instantly, send the money back and forth, and then I had the Bitcoin in my wallet and I delivered him the Nintendo Switch.

So this was kind of that big surprise for me is we now have tools that are very simple for people to use who onboard each other into Bitcoin. And when we got through with all this, I had a long conversation with Garry, kind of retrospective and getting his feelings of what he thought. And it was very interesting to me, his thoughts was: “You know, — he said,  —graduating from school, high school and getting his first bank account and going through this whole process, no one teaches you how to use online banking. No one teaches you how to do these things. And it’s very complicated.” And this allowed him quickly do it without KYC without any sort of third party. He gave someone money, they gave him Bitcoin and now Garry is an active bitcoiner.

So it was kind of that seeing someone who was not a technical person at all. He’s a preschool teacher who likes to play video games in the evening and always had an aversion to these things. Start learning about these tools that we have. And I said to Garry when we were finished with it that I kind of envied him because his first transactions, his first Bitcoin transactions, were the way I think a lot of us wish ours had gone. They were private and anonymous and peer-to-peer the way it was intended.

We kind of continue to develop this community in Czech Republic. It’s been amazing going to meetups and seeing people be so happy to have this kind of tool that they’re easily able to trade between each other very quickly and efficiently without any sort of oversight in any way. We at Vexl, we have no knowledge about anything that’s posted. So the offers are, every offer is encrypted for each individual. And we have no knowledge of them. We don’t have any record of the chats or anything. When you delete your account, everything is completely gone. There is no trace of any of you existing on our platform.

_[Ad]_

_Do you love coffee and Monero as much as we do? Consider making gratuitas.org your daily cup. Pay with Monero for premium fresh beans, and if you like what you taste, send a digital cash tip directly to the Guatemalan farmers that made it possible. Proceeds help us grow this channel. Gratuitas and Monero._

_**Grafton:**_ I know that we’re kind of running behind schedule, so I am happy to answer a couple of questions. But we do have, if you want to contact me on Twitter, or even Nolster: ashthevexldog, is my dog who is asleep on the sofa behind me. You can also tweet us at Vexl. And then I’m Satsdisco. I’m happy to answer any sort of questions, if there are any, now.

Yeah, cool. So I’ll check in the chat: is it a service like social media like Facebook? So, no, this is not a social media platform that you sign up and create an account on. This is strictly your contact, your phone number, and when you import your contacts, they’re completely encrypted for everyone. They’re only used to build the network so much like how Signal works. Except no one’s getting a, a message notifying you that, you know, “Bob joined Signal” or “Bob joined Vexl.” That doesn’t happen. This is just uses the network to build the net, uses your contacts to build the network. But we do not see the contacts. We cannot access the contacts. Only you have access to your own contacts.

Yep… where to seek…. Yeah, we are kind of trying to carry on with the mission of what the initial local bitcoin was which was fully peer-to-peer. Currently, the app is only available in Czech Republic and Slovakia. We’re really focused on building community here. Vexl is fully open source. You can check it out on our website vexl.it, which I can post here. Okay. But if you have any questions at all more, you can ask me. I’m like happy, but right now we’re really focused on Czech Republic and Slovakia and all I can say for that is stay tuned. That we do hope to build further around the world and grow the app and community even bigger.

Any other questions for our sign-off?

_**Question:**_ Hello? Mm-hm. Yo. Okay. Cool.

_**Grafton:**_ Alright. Well, thank you guys. Enjoy the conference. Yeah. And please, if like you had, like I said, if there’s any other questions, please reach out on Twitter and I’ll be happy to answer them. Alright. Enjoy Mexico.
